{"conditions":[{"name":"C.difficile (C.diff)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Clostridium-difficile","content":"Clostridium difficile - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Clostridium difficile  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Clostridium-difficile Clinical trials Clostridium difficile Introduction  Clostridium difficile, also known as C. difficile or C. diff, is a bacterium that can infect the bowel and cause diarrhoea. The infection most commonly affects people who have recently been treated with antibiotics, but can spread easily to others. C. difficile infections are unpleasant and can sometimes cause serious bowel problems, but they can usually be treated with another course of antibiotics. This page covers: Symptoms of a C. difficile infection Who's most at risk of C. difficile? When to get medical advice Treatment for C. difficile Looking after yourself at home How you get C. difficile How to stop C. difficile spreading Symptoms of a C. difficile infection Symptoms of a C. difficile infection usually develop when you're taking antibiotics, or when you've finished taking them within the last few weeks. The most common symptoms are: watery diarrhoea, which can be bloody painful tummy cramps feeling sick signs of dehydration, such as a dry mouth, headaches and peeing less often than normal a high temperature (fever) of above 38C (100.4F) loss of appetite and weight loss In some cases, serious complications can develop, such as damage to the bowel or severe dehydration, which may cause drowsiness, confusion, a rapid heart rate and fainting. Who's most at risk of C. difficile? C. difficile mostly affects people who: have been treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics (antibiotics that work against several types of bacteria) or several different antibiotics at the same time, or those taking long-term antibiotics have had to stay in a healthcare setting, such as a hospital or care home, for a long time are over 65 years old have certain underlying conditions, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), cancer or kidney disease have a weakened immune system, which can be because of a condition such as diabetes or a side effect of a treatment such as chemotherapy or steroid medication are taking a medication called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) to reduce the amount of stomach acid they produce have had surgery on their digestive system Many C. difficile infections used to occur in places where many people take antibiotics and are in close contact with each other, such as hospitals and care homes. However, strict infection control measures have helped to reduce this risk, and an increasing number of C. difficile infections now occur outside these settings. When to get medical advice Visiting your GP surgery with a possible C. difficile infection can put others at risk, so it's best to call your GP or NHS 111 if you're concerned or feel you need advice. Get medical advice if: you have persistent diarrhoea after finishing a course of antibiotics you have bloody diarrhoea you have diarrhoea and experience severe tummy pain, a high fever, a rapid heart rate or fainting you have symptoms of severe dehydration, such as confusion, drowsiness, only passing small amounts of urine or no urine at all Diarrhoea can be caused by a number of conditions and is a common side effect of antibiotics, so having diarrhoea while taking antibiotics doesn't necessarily mean you have a C. difficile infection. Your GP may suggest sending off a sample of your poo to confirm whether you have C. difficile. A blood test may also be carried out to help determine how severe the infection is, and sometimes you may need tests or scans in hospital to check if your bowel is damaged. Treatment for C. difficile Your GP will decide whether you need hospital treatment (if you're not already in hospital). If the infection is relatively mild, you may be treated at home. If you're in hospital, you might be moved to a room of your own during treatment to reduce the risk of the infection spreading to others. Treatment for C. difficile can include: stopping the antibiotics thought to be causing the infection, if possible \u2013 in mild cases, this may be the only treatment that's needed taking a 10 to 14-day course of antibiotics that are known to kill C. difficile bacteria rarely, serious infections may require surgery to remove a damaged section of the bowel C. difficile infections usually respond well to treatment, with most people making a full recovery in a week or two. However, the symptoms come back in around 1 in 5 cases and treatment may need to be repeated. Looking after yourself at home If you're well enough to be treated at home, the following measures can help relieve your symptoms and prevent the infection spreading: make sure you finish the entire course of any antibiotics you're prescribed, even if you're feeling better drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration and eat plain foods such as soup, rice, pasta and bread if you feel hungry take paracetamol for tummy pain or a fever don't take anti-diarrhoeal medication, as this can stop the infection being cleared from your body regularly wash your hands and contaminated surfaces, objects or sheets (see How to stop C. difficile spreading) stay at home until at least 48 hours after your last episode of diarrhoea Your GP may contact you regularly to make sure you're getting better. Call them if your symptoms return after treatment finishes, as it may need to be repeated. How you get C. difficile C. difficile bacteria are found in the digestive system of about 1 in every 30 healthy adults. The bacteria often live harmlessly because the other bacteria normally found in the bowel keep it under control. However, some antibiotics can interfere with the balance of bacteria in the bowel, which can cause the C. difficile bacteria to multiply and produce toxins that make the person ill. When this happens, C. difficile can spread easily to other people because the bacteria are passed out of the body in the person's diarrhoea. Once out of the body, the bacteria turn into resistant cells called spores. These can survive for long periods on hands, surfaces (such as toilets), objects and clothing unless they're thoroughly cleaned, and can infect someone else if they get into their mouth. Someone with a C. difficile infection is generally considered to be infectious until at least 48 hours after their symptoms have cleared up. How to stop C. difficile spreading C. difficile infections can be passed on very easily. You can reduce your risk of picking it up or spreading it by practising good hygiene, both at home and in healthcare settings. The following measures can help: stay at home until at least 48 hours after your symptoms have cleared up wash your hands regularly with soap and water, particularly after going to the toilet and before eating \u2013 use liquid rather than bar soap and don't use flannels or nail brushes clean contaminated surfaces \u2013 such as the toilet, flush handle, light switches and door handles \u2013 with a bleach-based cleaner after each use don't share towels and flannels wash contaminated clothes and sheets separately from other washing at the highest possible temperature when visiting someone in hospital, observe any visiting guidelines, avoid taking any children under the age of 12, and wash your hands with liquid soap and water when entering and leaving ward areas \u2013 don't rely on alcohol hand gels, as they're not effective against C. difficile avoid visiting hospital if you're feeling unwell or have recently had diarrhoea Read more about preventing germs from spreading. Page last reviewed: 03\/02\/2016 Next review due: 03\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 781 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 465  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 163  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful C difficile Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. The symptoms of C difficile range from mild to very severe diarrhoea. Get expert advice on how to avoid it, how it spreads and treatments that can control the disease. Media last reviewed: 07\/05\/2015 Next review due: 07\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Diarrhoea Antibiotics C. difficile and pregnancy Staying in hospital Home hygiene External links Lab Tests Online UK: C. difficile test Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections How to prevent germs from spreading Cleaning and good hygiene tips to help reduce the number of germs in your home NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CABG (coronary artery bypass graft)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Coronary-artery-bypass","content":"Coronary artery bypass graft - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coronary artery bypass graft  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coronary-artery-bypass Real stories Coronary-artery-bypass Clinical trials Coronary artery bypass graft Coronary-artery-bypass Getting ready Coronary-artery-bypass How it's performed Coronary-artery-bypass Recovery Coronary-artery-bypass Risks Coronary-artery-bypass Living with Coronary-artery-bypass Alternatives Introduction  A coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) is a surgical procedure used to treat coronary heart disease. It diverts blood around narrowed or clogged parts of the major arteries to improve blood flow and oxygen supply to the heart.  Around 20,000 coronary artery bypass grafts are carried out in England every year. Most of these are carried out in men, and around 80% are used to treat people who are at least 60 years of age. Why they're carried out Like all organs in the body, the heart needs a constant supply of blood. This is supplied by two large blood vessels called the left and right coronary arteries. Over time, these arteries can become narrowed and hardened by the build-up of fatty deposits called plaques. This process is known as atherosclerosis. People with atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries are said to have coronary heart disease. Your chances of developing coronary heart increase with age. You're also much more likely to be affected if: you smoke you're overweight or obese you have a high-fat diet Coronary heart disease can cause angina, which is chest pain that occurs when the supply of oxygen-rich blood to the heart becomes restricted. While many cases of angina can be treated with medication, severe angina may require a coronary artery bypass graft to improve the blood supply to the heart. Another risk associated with coronary heart disease is the possibility of one of the plaques in the coronary artery rupturing (splitting), creating a blood clot. If the blood clot blocks the blood supply to the heart, it can trigger a heart attack. Therefore, a coronary artery bypass graft may also be recommended to reduce your chances of having a heart attack. The procedure A coronary artery bypass graft involves taking a blood vessel from another part of the body \u2013 usually the chest, leg or arm \u2013 and attaching it to the coronary artery above and below the narrowed area or blockage. This new blood vessel is known as a graft. The number of grafts needed will depend on how severe your coronary heart disease is and how many of the coronary blood vessels are narrowed. A coronary artery bypass graft is carried out under general anaesthetic, which means you'll be unconscious during the operation. It usually takes between three and six hours. Read more about preparing for a coronary artery bypass graft and how a coronary artery bypass graft is performed. Recovery Most people will need to stay in hospital for at least seven days after having a coronary artery bypass graft. Recovering takes time and everyone recovers at slightly different speeds. Generally, you should be able to sit in a chair after one day, walk after three days and walk up and down stairs after five or six days. When you go home, you'll need to take things easy for a few weeks. You should be able to return to most of your normal activities after about six weeks, including working, driving, and having sex \u2013 most people make a full recovery within 12 weeks. Read more about recovering from a coronary artery bypass graft. Risks of surgery As with all types of surgery, a coronary artery bypass graft carries a risk of complications. These are usually relatively minor and treatable, such as an irregular heartbeat or a wound infection, but there's also a risk of serious complications such as a stroke or heart attack. Overall, more than 95% of people who have a coronary artery bypass graft will live for at least one year, and around 90% will live at least five years. Read more about the risks of a coronary artery bypass graft. After surgery After having a coronary artery bypass graft, most people will experience a significant improvement in symptoms such as breathlessness and chest pain, and their heart attack risk will be lowered. However, it's important to be aware that a coronary artery bypass graft isn't a cure for coronary heart disease. If you don't make lifestyle changes, such as eating a healthy diet and exercising regularly, your grafted arteries will also eventually become hardened and narrowed. In some cases, a coronary artery bypass graft may need to be repeated or you may need a procedure to widen your arteries using a small balloon and a tube called a stent (coronary angioplasty). Read more about healthy living after a coronary artery bypass graft. Alternatives A coronary angioplasty is the main alternative to a coronary artery bypass graft. It's a less invasive operation where a long, flexible hollow plastic tube called a catheter is inserted into a blood vessel in your arm or groin. A balloon attached to the catheter is then inflated to widen the artery and a small metal tube called a stent is often used to help keep the artery open. It usually takes less time to recover from a coronary angioplasty than from a coronary artery bypass graft, but there's a higher chance that the procedure will need to be repeated. Also, a coronary angioplasty may not be recommended if multiple coronary arteries have become blocked and narrowed or the structure of the blood vessels near your heart is abnormal. Read more about the alternatives to a coronary artery bypass graft. How long will I have to wait for surgery? The length of time you'll have to wait to have coronary artery bypass graft will vary from area to area. Your GP or cardiac surgeon should be able to tell you what the waiting lists are like in your area or at the hospital you've chosen. Ideally, you should be treated within three months of the decision to operate. Page last reviewed: 16\/12\/2015 Next review due: 16\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 422 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 235  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Heart bypass: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how a coronary artery bypass, a surgical procedure, is performed and why it would be needed. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Angina Coronary angioplasty Coronary heart disease Heart attack Healthy hearts External links BHF: treatments for coronary heart disease Heart Research UK: looking after your heart NICE: endoscopic CABG NICE: endoscopic leg vein removal NICE: off-pump CABG Coronary heart disease Coronary heart disease is responsible for more deaths than any other health condition, both in the UK and worldwide. Find out what you can do to avoid it 10 healthy heart tips Heart disease can be prevented by a healthy diet and lifestyle. Get the top 10 tips for a healthy heart Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Caesarean section","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Caesarean-section","content":"Caesarean section - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Caesarean section  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Caesarean-section Clinical trials Caesarean section Caesarean-section What happens Caesarean-section Recovery Caesarean-section Risks   A caesarean section, or C-section, is an operation to deliver your baby through a cut made in your tummy and womb. The cut is usually made across your tummy, just below your bikini line. A caesarean is a major operation that carries a number of risks, so it's usually only done if it's the safest option for you and your baby. Around one in every four to five pregnant women in the UK has a caesarean. This page covers: Why they're carried out Asking for one What happens Recovery Risks and complications Future pregnancies Why caesareans are carried out A caesarean may be recommended as a planned (elective) procedure or done in an emergency if it's thought a vaginal birth is too risky. They're usually performed after the 38th week of pregnancy. A caesarean may be carried out because: your baby is in the breech position (feet first) and your doctor has been unable to turn them by applying gentle pressure to your tummy, or you would prefer they didn't try this you have a low-lying placenta (placenta praevia) you have pregnancy-related high blood pressure (pre-eclampsia) you have certain infections, such as a first genital herpes infection occurring late in pregnancy or untreated HIV your baby isn't getting enough oxygen and nutrients \u2013 sometimes this may mean the baby needs to be delivered immediately your labour isn't progressing or there's excessive vaginal bleeding If there's time to plan the procedure, your midwife or doctor will discuss the benefits and risks of a caesarean compared with a vaginal birth. Asking for a caesarean Some women choose to have a caesarean for non-medical reasons. If you ask your midwife or doctor for a caesarean when there aren't medical reasons, they will explain the overall benefits and risks of a caesarean compared with a vaginal birth. If you're anxious about giving birth, you should be offered the chance to discuss your anxiety with a healthcare professional who can offer support during your pregnancy and labour. If after discussion and support you still feel that a vaginal birth isn't an acceptable option, you're entitled to have a planned caesarean. What happens during a caesarean Most caesareans are carried out under spinal or epidural anaesthetic. This mean you'll be awake, but the lower part of your body is numbed so you won't feel any pain. During the procedure: a screen is placed across your body so you can't see what's being done \u2013 the doctors and nurses will let you know what's happening a cut about 10-20cm long will usually be made across your lower tummy and womb so your baby can be delivered you may feel some tugging and pulling during the procedure you and you birth partner will be able to see and hold your baby as soon as they've been delivered The whole operation normally takes about 40-50 minutes. Occasionally a general anaesthetic, where you're asleep, may be used, particularly if the baby needs to be delivered more quickly. Read more about how a caesarean is carried out. Recovering from a caesarean Recovering from a caesarean usually takes longer than recovering from a vaginal delivery. You might need to stay in hospital for three or four days, compared with one or two days for a vaginal birth. You may experience some discomfort in your tummy for the first few days, and you'll be offered painkillers to help with this. When you go home, you'll need to take things easy at first. You may need to avoid some activities such as driving for six weeks or so. The wound in your tummy will eventually form a scar. This may be red and obvious at first, but it should fade with time and will often be hidden in your pubic hair. Read more about recovering from a caesarean. Risks of a caesarean A caesarean is generally a very safe procedure, but like any type of surgery it carries a certain amount of risk. It's important to be aware of the possible complications, particularly if you're considering having a caesarean for non-medical reasons. Possible complications include: infection of the wound or womb lining blood clots excessive bleeding damage to nearby areas, such as the bladder or the tubes that connect the kidneys and bladder (ureter) temporary breathing difficulties in your baby accidentally cutting your baby when your womb is opened Read more about the risks of a caesarean. Future pregnancies after a caesarean If you have a baby by caesarean, it doesn't necessarily mean that any babies you have in the future will also have to be delivered this way. Most women who have had a caesarean section can safely have a vaginal delivery for their next baby, known as vaginal birth after caesarean (VBAC). However, you may need some extra monitoring during labour just to make sure everything is progressing well. Some women may be advised to have another caesarean if they have another baby. This depends on whether a caesarean is still the safest option for them and their baby. For more information, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists has a leaflet on birth options after previous caesarean section (PDF, 357kb). Caesarean Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Learn about the importance of discussing a caesarean with your consultant before choosing to have one, the recovery period, and turning the birth into a positive experience. A video by Stockport NHS Foundation Trust. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Page last reviewed: 01\/07\/2016 Next review due: 01\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 111 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Birth and beyond for dads Common questions about pregnancy Epidural You after the birth Your birth plan External links NCT: caesarean National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): caesarean section Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG): birth after previous caesarean (PDF, 494kb) Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG): caesarean section (PDF, 206kb) Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy and baby guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Café-au-lait spots","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Birthmarks","content":"Birthmarks - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Birthmarks  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Birthmarks Birthmarks Treatment Birthmarks Complications   Birthmarks are coloured marks that are visible on the skin. They're often present at birth or develop soon afterwards. There are several different types of birthmark and some of them are very common. The two main types of birthmark are: vascular birthmarks (often red, purple or pink) caused by abnormal blood vessels in or under the skin pigmented birthmarks (usually brown) caused by clusters of pigment cells Vascular birthmarks often occur in the head and neck area, mainly on the face. But both types of birthmark can appear anywhere, including inside the body. If surface blood vessels are affected, a vascular birthmark will appear red, purple or pink. If the affected vessels are deep, the birthmark will appear blue. Pigmented birthmarks are tan or brown-coloured skin marks. Vascular birthmarks Some of the most common types of vascular birthmarks are described below. Salmon patch (stork mark) Salmon patches are flat red or pink patches that can appear on a baby's eyelids, neck or forehead at birth. They're the most common type of vascular birthmark and occur in around half of all babies. Most salmon patches will fade completely within a few months, but if they occur on the forehead they may take up to four years to disappear. Patches on the back of the neck can last longer. Salmon patches are often more noticeable when a baby cries because they fill with blood and become darker. Infantile haemangioma Infantile haemangiomas, also known as strawberry marks, are raised marks on the skin that are usually red. They can appear anywhere on the body. Sometimes infantile haemangiomas occur deeper in the skin, in which case the skin can look blue or purple. Haemangiomas are common, particularly in girls, and affect around 5% of babies soon after birth. They rapidly increase in size for the first six months before eventually shrinking and disappearing by around seven years of age. Haemangiomas that get bigger rapidly, or those that interfere with vision or feeding, may need to be treated. Capillary malformation (port wine stain) Capillary malformation, also known as port wine stains, are flat red or purple marks that affect a very small number of newborn babies. They can vary in size, from a few millimetres to several centimetres in diameter. Port wine stains often affect one side of the body and usually occur on the face, chest and back (although they can occur anywhere). They tend to be sensitive to hormones and may become more noticeable around puberty, pregnancy and the menopause. Most are permanent and may deepen in colour over time. Pigmented birthmarks Some of the most common types of pigmented birthmarks are described below. Café-au-lait spots Café-au-lait spots are coffee-coloured skin patches. Many children have one or two, but if more than six have developed by the time the child is five, you should see your GP. It could be a sign of neurofibromatosis (a number of genetic conditions that cause tumours to grow along the nerves). Mongolian spots Mongolian spots are blue-grey or bruised-looking birthmarks that are present from birth. They're more commonly seen in darker-skinned people and usually occur over the lower back or buttocks. However, they can also appear elsewhere on the body or limbs. Mongolian spots may last for months or years, but they usually disappear by the time a child reaches four years of age. They're completely harmless and don't need treatment. They may sometimes be mistaken for a bruise. Congenital melanocytic naevi Congenital melanocytic naevi are also known as congenital moles. They're relatively large brown or black moles that are present from birth. They're fairly common and are caused by an overgrowth of pigment cells in the skin. Most congenital melanocytic naevi become proportionally smaller and less obvious with time, although they may darken during puberty or become bumpy or hairy. They can range in size from less than 1.5cm (about 0.6 inches) to more than 20cm (about 7.9 inches) in diameter. The risk of a naevi developing into skin cancer is low, but the risk increases the larger it is. What causes birthmarks? It's not fully understood why birthmarks occur, but they're not usually inherited. Vascular birthmarks are caused by abnormal blood vessels in or under the skin, and pigmented birthmarks are caused by clusters of pigment cells. Port wine stains are thought to occur because the nerves that control the widening or narrowing of the capillaries (tiny blood vessels) don't function properly, or there aren't enough of them. This means that blood is constantly supplied to the skin in that area, which makes it permanently red or purple in colour. Port wine stains are sometimes related to other conditions, such as Sturge-Weber syndrome and Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome. Read more about the complications associated with birthmarks. Treating birthmarks Most birthmarks are harmless and don't need to be treated. Some types of birthmarks will fade over time, whereas other types such as port wine stains will be permanent if they're not treated. In some cases, a birthmark will need to be treated for medical reasons \u2013 for example, if a haemangioma blocks the airways, affects vision or becomes ulcerated. Some people may also decide to seek treatment for cosmetic reasons. Read more about treating birthmarks. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/06\/2016 Next review due: 14\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 144 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 82  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Birthmarks (haemangioma) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Haemangiomas are vascular birthmarks caused by abnormal blood vessels in or under the skin. Find out how to deal with birthmarks and what to do if they cause complications, such as problems with eyesight or breathing. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Cosmetic surgery Facial disfigurement Moles Plastic surgery Scars External links Birthmark Support Group British Association of Skin Camouflage Cavernoma Alliance UK Changing Faces: skin camouflage Great Ormond Street: skin laser treatment Skin Camouflage Network Treating birthmarks Advice on getting treatment for birthmarks, such as port wine stains and haemangiomas Find and choose services for Birthmarks Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Campylobacter","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/food-poisoning","content":"Food poisoning - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Food poisoning  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Food-poisoning Clinical trials Food poisoning Food-poisoning Causes Food-poisoning Treatment Food-poisoning Prevention Introduction  Food poisoning is an illness caused by eating contaminated food. It's not usually serious and most people get better within a few days without treatment. In most cases of food poisoning, the food is contaminated by bacteria, such as salmonella or Escherichia coli (E. coli), or a virus, such as the norovirus. Signs and symptoms The symptoms of food poisoning usually begin within one to two days of eating contaminated food, although they may start at any point between a few hours and several weeks later. The main symptoms include: feeling sick (nausea) vomiting diarrhoea, which may contain blood or mucus stomach cramps and abdominal (tummy) pain a lack of energy and weakness loss of appetite a high temperature (fever) aching muscles chills In most cases, these symptoms will pass in a few days and you will make a full recovery. What to do Most people with food poisoning recover at home and don't need any specific treatment, although there are some situations where you should see your GP for advice (see below). Until you feel better, you should rest and drink fluids to prevent dehydration. Try to drink plenty of water, even if you can only sip it. Eat when you feel up to it, but try small, light meals at first and stick to bland foods \u2013 such as toast, crackers, bananas and rice \u2013 until you begin to feel better. Oral rehydration solutions (ORS), which are available from pharmacies, are recommended for more vulnerable people, such as the elderly and those with another health condition. Read more about treating food poisoning. When to see your GP You should contact your GP if: your symptoms are severe \u2013 for example, if you're unable to keep down any fluids because you are vomiting repeatedly your symptoms don't start to improve after a few days you have symptoms of severe dehydration, such as confusion, a rapid heartbeat, sunken eyes and passing little or no urine you're pregnant you're over 60 your baby or young child has suspected food poisoning you have a long-term underlying condition, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), heart valve disease, diabetes or kidney disease you have a weak immune system \u2013 for example, because of medication, cancer treatment or HIV In these situations, your GP may send off a stool sample for analysis and prescribe antibiotics, or they may refer you to hospital so you can be looked after more closely. How is food contaminated? Food can become contaminated at any stage during production, processing or cooking. For example, it can be contaminated by: not cooking food thoroughly (particularly meat) not correctly storing food that needs to be chilled at below 5C leaving cooked food for too long at warm temperatures not sufficiently reheating previously cooked food someone who is ill or who has dirty hands touching the food eating food that has passed its \"use by\" date the spread of bacteria between contaminated foods (cross-contamination) Foods particularly susceptible to contamination if not handled, stored or cooked properly include: raw meat and poultry raw eggs raw shellfish unpasteurised milk \"ready-to-eat\" foods, such as cooked sliced meats, pâté, soft cheeses and pre-packed sandwiches Read more about the causes of food poisoning and preventing food poisoning. Page last reviewed: 23\/02\/2015 Next review due: 23\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2221 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1185  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 524  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 150  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 306  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Diarrhoea Food safety Escherichia coli (E. coli) O157 Gastroenteritis Nausea and vomiting in adults Norovirus Salmonella infections External links FSA: Find your local environmental health officer FSA: food hygiene ratings Foods to avoid if you're over 65 Find out why over-65s are at higher risk of food poisoning and what foods are risky Food safety How to prevent food poisoning at home, including E. coli, with advice on food safety and keeping germs in check NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer","content":"Cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer Cancer Signs and symptoms Cancer information and useful links  Cancer is a condition where cells in a specific part of the body grow and reproduce uncontrollably. The cancerous cells can invade and destroy surrounding healthy tissue, including organs. Cancer sometimes begins in one part of the body before spreading to other areas. This process is known as metastasis. There are over 200 different types of cancer, each with its own methods of diagnosis and treatment. You can find out more about specific types of cancer by using the links on this page. Spotting signs of cancer Changes to your body's normal processes or symptoms that are out of the ordinary can sometimes be an early sign of cancer. For example, a lump that suddenly appears on your body, unexplained bleeding or changes to your bowel habits are all symptoms that need to be checked by a doctor. In many cases, your symptoms won't be related to cancer and will be caused by other, non-cancerous health conditions. However, it's still important for you to see your GP so that they can investigate your symptoms. Read more about the signs and symptoms of cancer. Reducing your risk of cancer Making some simple changes to your lifestyle can significantly reduce your risk of developing cancer. For example, healthy eating, taking regular exercise and not smoking will help lower your risk. Read more about how a healthy lifestyle can help reduce your chances of developing cancer. How common is cancer? Cancer is a very common condition. In 2011, almost 331,500 people in the UK were diagnosed with cancer. More than one in three people will develop some form of cancer during their lifetime. In the UK, the four most common types of cancer are: breast cancer lung cancer   prostate cancer  bowel cancer In 2011, these types of cancer accounted for over half (53%) of all new cases. Cancer treatment Surgery is the primary treatment option for most types of cancer, because solid tumours can usually be surgically removed. Two other commonly used treatment methods are chemotherapy (powerful cancer-killing medication) and radiotherapy (the controlled use of high-energy X-rays). Waiting times Accurately diagnosing cancer can take weeks or months. As cancer often develops slowly, over several years, waiting for a few weeks won't usually impact on the effectiveness of treatment. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has produced referral guidelines for suspected cancer. You shouldn't have to wait more than two weeks to see a specialist if your GP suspects you have cancer and urgently refers you. In cases where cancer has been confirmed, you shouldn't have to wait more than 31 days from the decision to treat to the start of treatment. In 2012-13, 95.5% of people who were urgently referred for suspected cancer were seen by a specialist within 14 days of referral. In the same period, 98.4% of people receiving their first treatment for cancer began their treatment within 31 days. For breast cancer, over 99% of people began their treatment within 31 days of being diagnosed. Cancer services Find local cancer support services Find specialist cancer hospitals Find cancer support services for women Other cancer pages The Health A-Z covers many different types of cancer. See the links below for information about specific types of cancer. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia Acute myeloid leukaemia Anal cancer Bile duct cancer Bladder cancer Bone cancer Bowel cancer Brain tumour (high-grade) Brain tumour (low-grade\/mixed) Breast cancer (female) Breast cancer (male) Carcinoid tumours Cervical cancer Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Chronic myeloid leukaemia Endometrial cancer Ewing sarcoma Eye cancer Gallbladder cancer  Hairy cell leukaemia Head and neck cancer Hodgkin lymphoma Kaposi's sarcoma Kidney cancer Laryngeal cancer Liver cancer Lung cancer Mesothelioma Mouth cancer Multiple myeloma Nasopharyngeal cancer Neuroendocrine tumours Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Nose and sinus cancer Oesophageal cancer Ovarian cancer Pancreatic cancer Penile cancer Prostate cancer Rectal cancer Retinoblastoma Skin cancer (malignant melanoma) Skin cancer (non-melanoma) Soft tissue sarcoma Stomach cancer Testicular cancer Thyroid cancer Uterine cancer Vaginal cancer Vulval cancer  Page last reviewed: 03\/09\/2014 Next review due: 03\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 207 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Questions to ask the doctor Tips on how to make the most of a medical appointment, with a checklist of questions to ask Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment 'I had prostate cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Philip Kissi didn't notice any symptoms. He talks about his diagnosis and treatment Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your first priority is medical care. But there are people who can help with other aspects of your life Community from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Anal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-anus","content":"Anal cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Anal cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cancer-of-the-anus Clinical trials cancer-of-the-anus Community Anal cancer Introduction  Anal cancer is a rare type of cancer that affects the very end of the large bowel. Less than 1,200 people are diagnosed with cancer of the anus each year in the UK. Symptoms of anal cancer The symptoms of anal cancer are often similar to more common and less serious conditions affecting the anus, such as piles (haemorrhoids) and anal fissures (small tears or sores). Symptoms of anal cancer can include: bleeding from the bottom (rectal bleeding) itching and pain around the anus small lumps around the anus a discharge of mucus from the anus loss of bowel control (bowel incontinence) However, some people with anal cancer don't have any symptoms.  See your GP if you develop any of the above symptoms. While they're unlikely to be caused by anal cancer, it's best to get them checked out. Diagnosing anal cancer Your GP will usually ask about your symptoms and carry out some examinations. They may feel your tummy and carry out a rectal examination. This involves your doctor inserting a gloved finger into your bottom so they can feel any abnormalities. Your GP will refer you to hospital if they think further tests are necessary.  The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends in its 2015 guidelines that GPs should consider referring someone with an unexplained anal lump or anal ulcer. The person should receive an appointment within two weeks. If you're referred to hospital, a number of different tests may be carried out to check for anal cancer and rule out other conditions. Some of the tests you may have include a: sigmoidoscopy \u2013 where a thin, flexible tube with a small camera and light is inserted into your bottom to check for any abnormalities proctoscopy \u2013 where the inside of your rectum is examined using a hollow tube-like instrument (proctoscope) with a light on the end biopsy \u2013 where a small tissue sample is removed from your anus during a sigmoidoscopy or proctoscopy so it can be examined in a laboratory under a microscope  If these tests suggest you have anal cancer, you may have some scans to check whether the cancer has spread. Once these are complete, your doctors will be able to \"stage\" the cancer. This means giving it a score to describe how large it is and how far it has spread. You can read more about the stages of anal cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. How anal cancer is treated If you're diagnosed with anal cancer, you'll be cared for by a multidisciplinary team. This is a team of different specialists who work together to provide the best treatment and care. The main treatments used for anal cancer are: chemoradiation \u2013 a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy surgery \u2013 to remove a tumour or a larger section of bowel In cases where the cancer has spread and can't be cured, chemotherapy alone may be considered to help relieve symptoms. This is known as palliative care. The main treatments are described in more detail below. Chemoradiation Chemoradiation is a treatment that combines chemotherapy (cancer-killing medication) and radiotherapy (where radiation is used to kill cancer cells). It's currently the most effective treatment for anal cancer. You don't usually need to stay in hospital when you're having chemoradiation. Chemotherapy for anal cancer is usually given in two cycles, each lasting four to five days, with a four-week gap between the cycles. In many cases, part of the chemotherapy is delivered through a small tube called a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) in your arm, which can stay in place until your treatment has finished. The tube means you don't need to stay in hospital during each of the cycles of chemotherapy. However, you'll be attached to a small plastic pump, which you take home with you. A few hospitals now offer tablet chemotherapy for anal cancer, which avoids the need for the pump and PICC. Read more about how chemotherapy is carried out. Radiotherapy is usually given in short sessions, once a day from Monday to Friday, with a break at weekends. This is usually carried out for five to six weeks. To prepare for radiotherapy, additional scans will be required. Read more about how radiotherapy is carried out. Both chemotherapy and radiotherapy often cause significant side effects, including: tiredness sore skin around the anus sore skin around the penis and scrotum in men or vulva in women hair loss \u2013 limited hair loss from the head, but total loss from the pubic area feeling sick diarrhoea These side effects are usually temporary, but there's also a risk of longer-term problems, such as infertility. If you're concerned about the potential side effects of treatment, you should discuss this with your care team before treatment begins.  Other possible long-term side effects can include: bowel control problems long-term (chronic) diarrhoea erectile dysfunction vaginal pain when having sex dry and itchy skin around the groin and anus bleeding from the anus, rectum, vagina or bladder Tell your doctor if you develop any of these symptoms so they can be investigated and treated. Surgery Surgery is a less common treatment option for anal cancer. It's usually only considered if the tumour is small and can be easily removed, or if chemoradiation hasn't worked. If the tumour is very small and clearly defined, it may be cut out during a procedure called a local excision. This is a relatively simple procedure, carried out under general anaesthetic, that usually only requires a stay in hospital of a few days. If chemoradiation has been unsuccessful or the cancer has returned after treatment, a more complex operation called an abdominoperineal resection may be recommended. As with a local excision, this operation is carried out under general anaesthetic. An abdominoperineal resection involves removing your anus, rectum, part of the colon, some surrounding muscle tissue, and sometimes some of the surrounding lymph nodes (small glands that form part of the immune system) to reduce the risk of the cancer returning. You'll usually need to stay in hospital for up to 10 days after this type of surgery. During the operation, a permanent colostomy will also be formed to allow you to pass stools. This is where a section of the large intestine is diverted through an opening made in the abdomen called a stoma. The stoma is attached to a special pouch that will collect your stools after the operation. Before and after the operation, you'll see a specialist nurse who can offer support and advice to help you adapt to life with a colostomy. Adjusting to life with a colostomy can be challenging, but most people become accustomed to it over time. Read more about living with a colostomy. Follow-up After your course of treatment ends, you'll need to have regular follow-up appointments to monitor your recovery and check for any signs of the cancer returning. To start with, these appointments will be every few weeks or months, but they'll gradually become less frequent over time. What causes anal cancer? The exact cause of anal cancer is unknown, although a number of factors can increase your risk of developing the condition. These include: infection with human papilloma virus (HPV) \u2013 a common and usually harmless group of viruses spread through sexual contact, which can affect the moist membranes lining your body having anal sex or lots of sexual partners \u2013 possibly because this increases your risk of developing HPV having a history of cervical, vaginal or vulval cancer smoking having a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, if you have HIV Your risk of developing anal cancer increases as you get older, with half of all cases diagnosed in people aged 65 or over. The condition is also slightly more common in women than men. Outlook The outlook for anal cancer depends on how advanced the condition is when it's diagnosed. The earlier it's diagnosed, the better the outlook. Compared with many other types of cancer, the outlook for anal cancer is generally better because treatment is often very effective. Around 66 out of 100 people (66%) with anal cancer will live at least five years after diagnosis, and many will live much longer than this. There are about 300 deaths from anal cancer each year in the UK. Further information about anal cancer Cancer Research UK: anal cancer Macmillan: anal cancer Screening for anal cancer There isn't a screening programme in England for anal cancer. This is because there isn't currently enough evidence to show the benefits of offering screening would outweigh the risks. You can read more about screening for anal cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 07\/10\/2015 Next review due: 07\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 195 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bowel cancer Find cancer support services Health risks of anal sex Living with cancer External links Beating Bowel Cancer: anal cancer Cancer Research UK Colostomy Association Macmillan Rectal bleeding What to do if you are bleeding from the bottom, and the common causes Rectal examination A rectal examination is sometimes needed to check for problems and abnormalities. Find out more about the procedure and how it's carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Bile duct cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-bile-duct","content":"Bile duct cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bile duct cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Clinical trials Bile duct cancer Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Symptoms Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Causes Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Treatment Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Prevention Introduction  Bile duct cancer (cholangiocarcinoma) is a rare but aggressive type of cancer. The bile duct system, or \"biliary\" system, is made up of a series of tubes that begin in the liver and end in the small intestine. Bile is a fluid the digestive system uses to help break down fats and digest foods. Symptoms of bile duct cancer In most cases, there are no signs of bile duct cancer until it reaches the later stages, when symptoms can include: jaundice \u2013 yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes, itchy skin, pale stools and dark-coloured urine  unintentional weight loss abdominal pain See your GP if you have signs of jaundice or are worried about other symptoms. While it is unlikely you have bile duct cancer, it is best to get it checked. Read more about the symptoms of bile duct cancer. Why does bile duct cancer happen? The exact cause of bile duct cancer is unknown. However, some things may increase your chances of developing the condition. The most common include being over 65 years old or having a rare chronic liver disease called primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). Read more about the causes of bile duct cancer. Types of bile duct cancer There are two main types of bile duct cancer, depending on where the cancer begins: cancer that starts in a part of the bile duct inside the liver is known as intrahepatic bile duct cancer cancer that starts in part of the bile duct outside the liver is known as extrahepatic bile duct cancer Diagnosis Cancer of the bile duct can be difficult to diagnose, so you may need several tests, including:  blood tests ultrasound scans computerised tomography (CT) scans magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans For some of these tests, you may need to be injected with a special dye that highlights your bile ducts. You may also need a biopsy. This involves removing a small sample of tissue so it can be studied under a microscope. However, in some cases, your surgeon may prefer to remove the suspected tumour based on the results of your scans alone. Read more about diagnosing bile duct cancer. How is bile duct cancer treated? Cancer of the bile duct can usually only be cured if cancerous cells haven't spread. If this is the case, some or all of the bile duct may be removed. Only a small proportion of bile duct cancer cases are diagnosed early enough to be suitable for surgery. This is because symptoms usually develop at a late stage. Despite this, treatment such as chemotherapy can relieve the symptoms of bile duct cancer and improve the quality of life of people in the advanced stages of the condition. Read more about treating bile duct cancer.   Who is affected? Less than 2,000 people are diagnosed with bile duct cancer each year in Great Britain. However, studies suggest that cases of bile duct cancer are increasing in most countries. The reasons for this are unknown. Most cases of bile duct cancer occur in people over the age of 65. The condition affects men and women almost equally. Can bile duct cancer be prevented? There are no guaranteed ways to avoid getting bile duct cancer, but you can reduce your chances of developing it. The most effective ways of achieving this are reducing your alcohol intake, as cirrhosis is a risk factor, and trying to ensure that you don't become infected with hepatitis B or hepatitis C. Read more about preventing bile duct cancer. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/10\/2014 Next review due: 24\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 107 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Carers and support End of life issues for carers Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Jaundice Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links The Alan Morement Memorial Fund (AMMF) British Liver Trust Cancer Research UK Macmillan Cancer Support PSC Support Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Bladder cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-bladder","content":"Bladder cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bladder cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-bladder Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-bladder Community Bladder cancer Cancer-of-the-bladder Symptoms Cancer-of-the-bladder Causes Cancer-of-the-bladder Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-bladder Treatment Cancer-of-the-bladder Complications Cancer-of-the-bladder Prevention Introduction  Bladder cancer is where a growth of abnormal tissue, known as a tumour, develops in the bladder lining. In some cases, the tumour spreads into the surrounding muscles. The most common symptom of bladder cancer is blood in your urine, which is usually painless. If you notice blood in your urine, even if it comes and goes, you should visit your GP, so the cause can be investigated. Read about the symptoms of bladder cancer. Types of bladder cancer Once diagnosed, bladder cancer can be classified by how far it has spread.  If the cancerous cells are contained inside the lining of the bladder, doctors describe it as non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer. This is the most common type of bladder cancer, accounting for 7 out of 10 cases. Most people don't die as a result of this type of bladder cancer. When the cancerous cells spread beyond the lining, into the surrounding muscles of the bladder, it's referred to as muscle-invasive bladder cancer. This is less common, but has a higher chance of spreading to other parts of the body and can be fatal. If bladder cancer has spread to other parts of the body, it's known as locally advanced or metastatic bladder cancer. Read more about diagnosing bladder cancer. Why does bladder cancer happen? Most cases of bladder cancer appear to be caused by exposure to harmful substances, which lead to abnormal changes in the bladder's cells over many years.  Tobacco smoke is a common cause and it's estimated that half of all cases of bladder cancer are caused by smoking. Contact with certain chemicals previously used in manufacturing is also known to cause bladder cancer. However, these substances have since been banned. Read more about the causes of bladder cancer and preventing bladder cancer. Treating bladder cancer In cases of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer, it's usually possible to remove the cancerous cells while leaving the rest of the bladder intact. This is done using a surgical technique called transurethral resection of a bladder tumour (TURBT). This is followed by a dose of chemotherapy medication directly into the bladder, to reduce the risk of the cancer returning. In cases with a higher risk of recurrence, a medication known as Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) may be injected into the bladder to reduce the risk of the cancer returning. Treatment for high-risk non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer, or muscle-invasive bladder cancer may involve surgically removing the bladder in an operation known as a cystectomy. When the bladder is removed, you'll need another way of collecting your urine. Possible options include making an opening in the abdomen so urine can be passed into an external bag, or constructing a new bladder out of a section of bowel. This will be done at the same time as a cystectomy. If it's possible to avoid removing the bladder, or if surgery is not suitable, a course of radiotherapy and chemotherapy may be recommended. Chemotherapy may sometimes be used on its own before surgery or before being combined with radiotherapy. After treatment for all types of bladder cancer, you'll have regular follow-up tests to check for signs of recurrence. Read more about treating bladder cancer. Who is affected? About 10,000 people are diagnosed with bladder cancer every year and it's the seventh most common cancer in the UK. The condition is more common in older adults, with more than half of all new cases diagnosed in people aged 75 and above. Bladder cancer is also more common in men than in women, possibly because in the past, men were more likely to smoke and work in the manufacturing industry. Page last reviewed: 11\/05\/2015 Next review due: 11\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 496 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 260  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 146  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support guide Chemotherapy Find services: cancer support Living with cancer Radiotherapy External links Action on Bladder Cancer Cancer Research UK: bladder cancer Fight Bladder Cancer Macmillan: bladder cancer Penny Brohn Cancer Care My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NICE guidelines: bladder cancer diagnosis and management Call your GP today If you notice blood in your pee, even if it\u2019s \u2018just the once\u2019, tell your doctor. Call your GP today Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your first priority is medical care. But there are people who can help with other aspects of your life Find and choose services for Bladder cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Bone cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-bone","content":"Bone cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bone cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-bone Real stories Cancer-of-the-bone Clinical trials Bone cancer Cancer-of-the-bone Symptoms Cancer-of-the-bone Causes Cancer-of-the-bone Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-bone Treatment Introduction  Primary bone cancer is a rare type of cancer that begins in the bones. Around 550 new cases are diagnosed each year in the UK. This is a separate condition from secondary bone cancer, which is cancer that spreads to the bones after developing in another part of the body. These pages only refer to primary bone cancer. The Macmillan Cancer Support website has more information about secondary bone cancer. Signs and symptoms of bone cancer Bone cancer can affect any bone, but most cases develop in the long bones of the legs or upper arms. The main symptoms include: persistent bone pain that gets worse over time and continues into the night swelling and redness (inflammation) over a bone, which can make movement difficult if the affected bone is near a joint a noticeable lump over a bone a weak bone that breaks (fractures) more easily than normal If you or your child are experiencing persistent, severe or worsening bone pain, visit your GP. While it's highly unlikely to be the result of bone cancer, it does require further investigation. Read more about the symptoms of bone cancer. Types of bone cancer Some of the main types of bone cancer are: osteosarcoma \u2013 the most common type, which mostly affects children and young adults under 20 Ewing sarcoma \u2013 which most commonly affects people aged between 10 and 20 chondrosarcoma \u2013 which tends to affect adults aged over 40 Young people can be affected because the rapid growth spurts that occur during puberty may make bone tumours develop. The above types of bone cancer affect different types of cell. The treatment and outlook will depend on the type of bone cancer you have. What causes bone cancer? In most cases, it's not known why a person develops bone cancer. You're more at risk of developing it if you: have had previous exposure to radiation during radiotherapy have a condition known as Paget\u2019s disease of the bone \u2013 however, only a very small number of people with Paget\u2019s disease will actually develop bone cancer have a rare genetic condition called Li-Fraumeni syndrome \u2013 people with this condition have a faulty version of a gene that normally helps stop the growth of cancerous cells Read more about the causes of bone cancer. How bone cancer is treated Treatment for bone cancer depends on the type of bone cancer you have and how far it has spread. Most people have a combination of: surgery to remove the section of cancerous bone \u2013 it's often possible to reconstruct or replace the bone that's been removed, but amputation is sometimes necessary chemotherapy \u2013 treatment with powerful cancer-killing medication radiotherapy \u2013 where radiation is used to destroy cancerous cells In some cases of osteosarcoma, a medication called mifamurtide may also be recommended. Read more about treating bone cancer. Outlook The outlook for bone cancer depends on factors such as your age, the type of bone cancer you have, how far the cancer has spread (the stage), and how likely it is to spread further (the grade). Generally, bone cancer is much easier to cure in otherwise healthy people whose cancer hasn't spread. Overall, around 6 in every 10 people with bone cancer will live for at least 5 years from the time of their diagnosis, and many of these may be cured completely. For more detailed statistics broken down by the different types of bone cancer, see the page on statistics and outlook for bone cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 06\/05\/2015 Next review due: 06\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 128 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with cancer Ewing sarcoma Radiotherapy Chemotherapy External links Bone Cancer Research Trust Teenage cancer trust My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Find and choose services for bone cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Brain tumours","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/brain-tumours","content":"Brain tumours - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Brain tumours  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview brain-tumours Clinical trials Brain tumours Introduction  A brain tumour is a growth of cells in the brain that multiplies in an abnormal, uncontrollable way. It can either be cancerous (malignant) or non-cancerous (benign). Brain tumours are graded from 1 to 4 according to their behaviour, such as how fast they grow and how likely they are to grow back after treatment.  Benign brain tumours are low grade (grade 1 or 2), which means they grow slowly and are less likely to return after treatment. Malignant brain tumours are high grade (grade 3 or 4) and either start in the brain (primary tumours) or spread into the brain from elsewhere (secondary tumours); they're more likely to grow back after treatment. This page gives general information relevant to both types of brain tumour. The links above will take you to more information about the specific types. Symptoms of a brain tumour The symptoms of a brain tumour vary depending on the exact part of the brain that's affected. Common symptoms include: severe, persistent headaches seizures (fits) persistent nausea, vomiting and drowsiness mental or behavioural changes, such as memory problems or changes in personality progressive weakness or paralysis on one side of the body, vision problems, or speech problems Sometimes, you may not have any symptoms to begin with or they may only develop very slowly over time. When to see your GP See your GP if you have persistent symptoms of a brain tumour. While it's unlikely to be a tumour, it's best to be sure by getting a proper diagnosis. If your GP is unable to identify a more likely cause of your symptoms, they may refer you to a neurologist for further assessment and tests, such as a brain scan. Who is affected Brain tumours can affect people of any age, including children, although they tend to be more common in older adults. More than 9,000 people are diagnosed with primary brain tumours in the UK each year, of which about half are benign and half are malignant. Many others are diagnosed with secondary brain tumours. The exact reason why some people develop primary brain tumours is unknown, but it's thought that certain genetic conditions \u2013 such as neurofibromatosis type 1 and tuberous sclerosis \u2013 and previous radiotherapy to the head increase your risk. Treatment and outlook The main treatment for most brain tumours is surgery, which aims to remove as much of the abnormal tissue as possible. It's not always possible to remove the entire tumour, so further treatment with radiotherapy and\/or chemotherapy may be necessary to kill any abnormal cells left behind. For most benign tumours, treatment is often successful and a full recovery is possible, although there's sometimes a small chance the tumour could come back. Regular follow-up appointments will normally be recommended to monitor this. The outlook for malignant tumours is generally less good, although this varies depending on things such as where the tumour is in the brain, your age, and your general health. Unfortunately, a cure is often not possible and most tumours will return after treatment. If a tumour does come back, treatment will aim to relieve your symptoms and prolong life by controlling the growth of the tumour.  Support and further information As well as reading the separate pages on benign brain tumours and malignant brain tumours, you may find the following websites useful sources of information and support: The Brain Tumour Charity Brain Tumour Research HeadSmart: be brain tumour aware Cancer Research UK: brain tumours  Macmillan: brain tumours Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/03\/2015 Next review due: 17\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 127 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Benign brain tumours (non-cancerous) Malignant brain tumours (cancerous) External links Brain Tumour Research The Brain Tumour Charity HeadSmart campaign Brain and Spine Foundation Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice Cancer: your test results If you're waiting for your test results, find out how you can prepare for your consultation NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"BRCA gene mutation test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/predictive-genetic-tests-cancer","content":"Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes Introduction  Cancer is not usually inherited, but some types \u2013 mainly breast, ovarian, colorectal and prostate cancer \u2013 can be strongly influenced by genes and can run in families.  We all carry certain genes that are normally protective against cancer \u2013 they correct any DNA damage that naturally occurs when cells divide. Inheriting faulty versions or \"variants\" of these genes significantly raises your risk of developing cancer, because the altered genes cannot repair the damaged cells, which can build up and form a tumour. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are two examples of genes that raise your cancer risk if they become altered. Having a variant BRCA gene greatly increases a woman's chance of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer. This was the reason Angelina Jolie had preventative breast cancer surgery, followed by ovarian cancer surgery. They also increase a man's chance of developing male breast cancer and prostate cancer.  BRCA genes are not the only cancer risk genes. Researchers recently identified more than 100 new gene variants associated with an increased risk of breast, prostate and ovarian cancer. Individually, these new gene variants only slightly increase the risk of cancer, but a combination could mean a high risk overall. If you or your partner have a high-risk cancer gene, such as an altered version of BRCA1, it can be passed on to any children you have.  If you're concerned, read on. This page covers: What to do if you're worried  Pros and cons of having a predictive genetic test  What testing involves  What a positive result means   Managing your risk  Telling close relatives  Planning a family  Paying for private testing What to do if you're worried  Speak to your GP if cancer runs in your family and you're worried you may get it too. They may refer you to a local genetics service for an NHS genetic test, which will tell you if you have inherited one of the cancer risk genes.  This type of testing is known as predictive genetic testing. It's \"predictive\" because a positive result means you have a greatly increased risk of developing cancer. It doesn't mean you have cancer or are definitely going to develop it. You may be eligible for this NHS test if the faulty gene has already been identified in one of your relatives, or if there is a strong family history of cancer in your family. See What testing involves, below. Pros and cons of having a predictive genetic test  Not everyone who is eligible for the NHS test will want to have it. It's a personal decision, and should only be made after you've had genetic counselling sessions and talked through what having the test means, how you may feel and how you will cope. Advantages a positive result means you can take steps to manage your risk of developing cancer \u2013 you can make certain lifestyle changes to lower your risk, have regular screening and have preventative treatment (see Managing your risk, below) knowing the result may reduce any stress and anxiety that comes from not knowing Disadvantages the results of some genetic tests are inconclusive \u2013 doctors may identify a variation in a gene, but not know what effect it may have a positive result may cause permanent anxiety \u2013 some people would rather not know about their risk and only want to be told if they actually develop cancer What testing involves   There are usually two steps to genetic testing: A relative with cancer has a diagnostic blood test to see if they have a cancer risk gene (this normally must happen before any healthy relatives are tested). Their result will be ready four to eight weeks later. If your relative's test is positive, you can have the predictive genetic test to see if you have the same faulty gene. Your GP will refer you to your local genetics service for the blood test (you'll need a copy of your relative's test results). The result will take up to two weeks to come through after a blood sample is taken, but this may not happen at your first appointment. This test is fully predictive as a \"clear\" negative test, which will mean you have not inherited the family high risk of cancer. The charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer explains the importance of these two steps: \"Without looking at the genes of an affected relative first, testing a healthy individual would be like reading through an entire book looking for a spelling mistake without knowing where the mistake is, or if there is a mistake at all.\" When there are no affected relatives available, full testing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 may be possible for those with at least a 10% chance of having a genetic fault. This usually means having a very strong family history of early onset breast and particularly ovarian cancer. It takes four to eight weeks to get the result, but this is not fully predictive as a negative test, so cannot rule out that the problem in relatives is due to a different gene. What a positive result means  If your predictive genetic test result is positive, it means you have a faulty gene that raises your risk of developing cancer. It doesn't mean you are guaranteed to get cancer \u2013 your genes only partly influence your future health risks. Other factors, such as your medical history, lifestyle and your environment, also play a role. If you have one of the faulty BRCA genes, there is a 50% chance you will pass this on to any children you have and a 50% chance that each of your siblings also has it. You may want to discuss your results with other members of your family, who may also be affected. The genetics clinic will discuss with you how a positive or negative result will affect your life and your relationships with your family. You can read more about this in the beginner's guide to BRCA1 and BRCA2 (PDF, 866kb) produced by The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust. Insurance companies cannot ask you to disclose the results of predictive genetic tests for the majority of policies, but this may change in the future. Managing your risk   If your test result is positive, you have a range of options to manage your risk. Risk-reducing surgery is not the only option. Ultimately, there's no right or wrong answer about what you should do \u2013 it's a decision only you can make. Regularly examining your breasts If you have the faulty BRCA1\/2 gene, it's a good idea to be aware of changes in your breasts. Read more about being breast cancer aware. This advice applies to men with a faulty BRCA2 gene too, as they are also at increased risk of breast cancer (although to a lesser extent). Screening In the case of breast cancer, annual breast screening in the form of mammograms and MRI scans can also monitor your condition and catch cancer early, if it does develop. Detecting breast cancer at an early stage means it may be easier to treat. The chance of making a full recovery from breast cancer, especially if it is detected early, is relatively high compared with other forms of cancer. Unfortunately, there's currently no reliable screening test for ovarian cancer or prostate cancer. Read more about screening for prostate cancer. However, annual PSA tests for prostate cancer may benefit men who carry the faulty BRCA2 gene. Lifestyle changes Changes in your lifestyle can sometimes reduce your individual cancer risk. These include taking plenty of exercise and eating a healthy diet. If you have a faulty BRCA gene, be aware of other factors that could increase your risk of breast cancer. It's recommended that you avoid: the oral contraceptive pill if you are over 35 combined hormone replacement therapy (HRT) if you\u2019re over 50 drinking more than the maximum recommended daily limits of alcohol being overweight The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) also recommends that women with a family history of breast cancer breastfeed their children, if possible. Read about the things that may help to prevent ovarian cancer. Medication (chemoprevention) NICE has recommended treatment with tamoxifen or raloxifene for a specific group of women who have a high risk of developing breast cancer. These medicines can reduce the risk of breast cancer for up to 20 years from five years of taking them. For more information, read the article: Drugs to be offered to women at high risk of breast cancer, which also explains the side effects these medicines can cause. Read the full NICE 2013 guidelines on familial breast cancer.   Risk-reducing surgery Risk-reducing surgery means removing all the tissue (such as the breasts or ovaries) that could become cancerous. Carriers of a faulty BRCA gene may wish to consider a preventative mastectomy.   Women who have risk-reducing mastectomies reduce their risk of developing breast cancer by around 90%. However, a mastectomy is a major operation and recovering from it can be physically and emotionally difficult. Surgery can also be used to reduce ovarian cancer risk. Women who have their ovaries removed before the menopause not only dramatically reduce their risk of developing ovarian cancer, but also reduce their risk of developing breast cancer by up to 50%. However, this will trigger an early menopause and mean you're not able to have your own children (unless you store eggs or embryos). Read more about surgery to remove the ovaries, including the risks and after-effects. The risk of ovarian cancer in women who carry a BRCA gene fault does not begin to rise significantly until about the age of 40. Therefore, carriers of the faulty gene who are younger than 40 usually wait to have this operation. Telling close relatives   Your genetics unit will not approach your relatives about your result \u2013 it will usually be up to you to tell your family. You may be given a standard letter to share with relatives, which explains your test result and contains all the information they need to be referred for the test themselves. However, not everyone will want to have the genetic test. Women who are closely related to you (such as your sister or daughter) can have cancer screening without having genetic testing. Planning a family  Cancer risk genes can be passed on to any children you have. If your predictive genetic test is positive and you want to start a family, you have several options. You can: Have your children without any intervention, and risk your child inheriting the faulty gene. Adopt a baby. Use donor eggs or donor sperm (depending on who carries the faulty gene) to avoid passing on the faulty gene. Have prenatal testing, which is a test done in pregnancy that reveals whether your baby has the faulty gene. You can then plan to continue or terminate the pregnancy, depending on the test result. Have pre-implantation genetic diagnosis \u2013 a technique used to select embryos that have not inherited the faulty gene. However, there is no guarantee this technique will result in a successful pregnancy, and funding for it on the NHS may not be available to all patients. Paying for private testing If there isn't a strong family history of cancer in your family and the faulty gene hasn't otherwise been identified in any of your relatives, you won't be eligible for the NHS genetic test. You'll have to pay for it privately if you still wish to have the test. Consider this carefully, because: if you don't have any family history of cancer, it's unlikely you have one of the faulty genes the tests can be expensive, potentially costing up to £500-2,000 or more there's no guarantee they will predict whether you'll develop cancer you may not be offered genetic counselling to help you make a decision and support you once you get your results About BRCA1 and BRCA2 If you have a fault (mutation) in one of the BRCA genes, your risk of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer is greatly increased.   Women with the faulty BRCA1 gene, for example, have a 60-90% lifetime risk of breast cancer and a 40-60% risk of ovarian cancer. In other words, out of every 100 women with the faulty BRCA1 gene, between 60 and 90 will develop breast cancer in their lifetime and between 40 and 60 will develop ovarian cancer. The faulty BRCA genes affect around 1 in every 400 people, but people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent are at a much higher risk (as many as 1 in 40 may carry the faulty gene). For more information, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust has produced a beginner's guide to BRCA1 and BRCA2 (PDF, 867kb). Page last reviewed: 05\/05\/2015 Next review due: 05\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 83 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breast cancer Mastectomy Ovarian cancer Prostate cancer External links Cancer Research UK: genes and cancer Macmillan: genetic testing News analysis: Angelina Jolie's breast cancer surgery Actress Angelina Jolie has had a double mastectomy to reduce her high genetic risk of breast cancer. We explain the science behind the headlines Faulty genes and breast cancer The genes associated with breast cancer, what it means to have a faulty gene, and who gets tested NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Breast cancer (female)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-breast-female","content":"Breast cancer (female) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Breast cancer (female)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-breast-female Real stories Cancer-of-the-breast-female Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-breast-female Community Cancer-of-the-breast-female Breast cancer (female) Cancer-of-the-breast-female Symptoms Cancer-of-the-breast-female Causes Cancer-of-the-breast-female Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-breast-female Treatment Cancer-of-the-breast-female Living with Cancer-of-the-breast-female Prevention Introduction  Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer in the UK. In 2011, just under 50,000 women were diagnosed with invasive breast cancer. Most women who get it (8 out of 10) are over 50, but younger women, and in rare cases, men, can also get breast cancer. If it's treated early enough, breast cancer can be prevented from spreading to other parts of the body. The breasts The breasts are made up of fat, connective tissue and thousands of tiny glands called lobules, which produce milk. When a woman has a baby, the milk is delivered to the nipple through tiny tubes called ducts, which allow her to breastfeed. The body is made up of billions of tiny cells, which usually grow and multiply in an orderly way. New cells are only produced when and where they're needed. In cancer, this orderly process goes wrong and cells begin to grow and multiply uncontrollably. Read more about the causes of breast cancer. Symptoms of breast cancer Breast cancer can have a number of symptoms, but the first noticeable symptom is usually a lump or area of thickened breast tissue. Most breast lumps aren't cancerous, but it's always best to have them checked by your doctor. You should also see your GP if you notice any of the following: a change in the size or shape of one or both breasts discharge from either of your nipples (which may be streaked with blood) a lump or swelling in either of your armpits dimpling on the skin of your breasts a rash on or around your nipple a change in the appearance of your nipple, such as becoming sunken into your breast Breast pain isn't usually a symptom of breast cancer. Learn more about the symptoms of breast cancer. After examining your breasts, your GP may refer you to a specialist breast cancer clinic for further tests. This might include a mammography (breast screening) or a biopsy. Read more about breast screening and how breast cancer is diagnosed. Types of breast cancer There are several different types of breast cancer, which can develop in different parts of the breast. Breast cancer is often divided into non-invasive and invasive types. Non-invasive breast cancer Non-invasive breast cancer is also known as cancer or carcinoma in situ. This cancer is found in the ducts of the breast and hasn't developed the ability to spread outside the breast. This form of cancer rarely shows as a lump in the breast that can be felt, and is usually found on a mammogram (see below). The most common type of non-invasive cancer is ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Invasive breast cancer Invasive cancer has the ability to spread outside the breast, although this doesn't necessarily mean it has spread. The most common form of breast cancer is invasive ductal breast cancer, which develops in the cells that line the breast ducts. Invasive ductal breast cancer accounts for about 80% of all breast cancer cases and is sometimes called \"no special type\". Other types of breast cancer Other less common types of breast cancer include invasive lobular breast cancer, which develops in the cells that line the milk-producing lobules, inflammatory breast cancer and Paget's disease of the breast. It's possible for breast cancer to spread to other parts of the body, usually through the lymph nodes (small glands that filter bacteria from the body) or the bloodstream. If this happens, it's known as \"secondary\" or \"metastatic\" breast cancer. Breast cancer screening About one in eight women are diagnosed with breast cancer during their lifetime. There's a good chance of recovery if it's detected in its early stages. For this reason, it's vital that women check their breasts regularly for any changes and always get any changes examined by their GP. Mammographic screening (where X-ray images of the breast are taken) is the best available method of detecting an early breast lesion. However, you should be aware that a mammogram might fail to detect some breast cancers. It might also increase your chances of having extra tests and interventions, including surgery. Women with a higher-than-average risk of developing breast cancer may be offered screening and genetic testing for the condition. As the risk of breast cancer increases with age, all women who are 50-70 years old are invited for breast cancer screening every three years. Women over 70 are also entitled to screening and can arrange an appointment through their GP or local screening unit. The NHS is in the process of extending the programme as a trial, offering screening to some women aged 47-73. Read more about breast screening and find breast cancer screening services near you. Treating breast cancer If cancer is detected at an early stage, it can be treated before it spreads to nearby parts of the body. Breast cancer is treated using a combination of surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Surgery is usually the first type of treatment you'll have, followed by chemotherapy or radiotherapy or, in some cases, hormone or biological treatments. The type of surgery and the treatment you have afterwards will depend on the type of breast cancer you have. Your doctor will discuss the best treatment plan with you. Read a document listing the one-year net survival estimates by CCG for breast cancer In a small proportion of women, breast cancer is discovered after it's spread to other parts of the body (metastasis). Secondary cancer, also called advanced or metastatic cancer, isn't curable, so the aim of treatment is to achieve remission (symptom relief). Read more about treating breast cancer. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS organisations that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population that they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for breast cancer survival (PDF, 900 Kb). Preventing breast cancer As the causes of breast cancer aren't fully understood, it's not possible to know if it can be prevented altogether. If you're at increased risk of developing the condition, some treatments are available to reduce the risk. Studies have looked at the link between breast cancer and diet and, although there are no definite conclusions, there are benefits for women who maintain a healthy weight, exercise regularly and who have a low intake of saturated fat and alcohol. It's been suggested that regular exercise can reduce your risk of breast cancer by as much as a third. If you've been through the menopause, it's particularly important that you're not overweight or obese. This is because being overweight or obese causes more oestrogen to be produced, which can increase the risk of breast cancer. Read more about preventing breast cancer. Living with breast cancer Being diagnosed with breast cancer can affect daily life in many ways, depending on what stage it's at and what treatment you're having. How women cope with their diagnosis and treatment varies from person to person. You can be reassured that there are several forms of support available, if you need it. For example: your family and friends can be a powerful support system you can communicate with other people in the same situation find out as much as possible about your condition don't try to do too much or overexert yourself make time for yourself Read more about living with breast cancer. JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Page last reviewed: 19\/08\/2014 Next review due: 19\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 463 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 207  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 120  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breast screening Breast cancer genes Breast cancer awareness Breast reconstruction Cancer Chemotherapy Find cancer support services Herceptin Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes Radiotherapy External links Against Breast Cancer Breast Cancer Now Breast Cancer Care Cancer Research UK healthtalk.org Lab Tests Online UK: BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 tests NHS Breast Screening Programme Option Grid: surgery decision aid My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services World Cancer Research Fund Community content from HealthUnlocked Breast cancer screening Why and when it is offered, what happens on the day, and receiving your results News analysis: Angelina Jolie's breast cancer surgery Actress Angelina Jolie has had a double mastectomy to reduce her high genetic risk of breast cancer. We explain the science behind the headlines NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Breast cancer (male)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-breast-male","content":"Breast cancer in men - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Breast cancer in men  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-breast-male Real stories Cancer-of-the-breast-male Clinical trials Breast cancer in men Cancer-of-the-breast-male Symptoms Cancer-of-the-breast-male Causes Cancer-of-the-breast-male Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-breast-male Treatment Introduction  Breast cancer is often thought of as a condition that only affects women, but men can also develop it. It's much less common in men than women, with only around 1 new case of breast cancer diagnosed for every 100,000 men (about 350 to 400 cases) in the UK each year.   The cancer develops in the small amount of breast tissue men have behind their nipples. The most common symptom is a hard, painless lump in one of the breasts. However, the vast majority of breast lumps are caused by a condition called gynaecomastia. This is a common non-cancerous condition where male breast tissue becomes enlarged. Breast cancer in men can also cause nipple problems, such as the nipple turning in on itself (retraction) or nipple discharge. Read more about the symptoms of male breast cancer. When to see your GP You should always talk to your GP if you notice a lump in your breast or you have problems affecting your nipples, such as discharge. While these symptoms are unlikely to be caused by breast cancer, they should be investigated further.  Why it happens The cause of male breast cancer is unclear, but factors known to increase your chances of developing the condition include: age \u2013 most cases affect men over the age of 60 having a family history of breast cancer (male or female) obesity \u2013 a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or more Read more about causes of breast cancer in men. Treating breast cancer in men In most cases, surgery is used to remove the cancer, along with a section of the breast. This may be followed by a long-term course of hormone-blocking therapy using medication, usually a drug called tamoxifen. Tamoxifen helps block the effects of hormones known to stimulate the growth of cancerous cells in breast tissue. It should help prevent the cancer returning. In some cases, radiotherapy or chemotherapy may be used for the same purpose. Read more about treating breast cancer in men. Outlook The outlook for breast cancer is not as good in men as in women. This is because there's reduced awareness of the condition and it may take longer to diagnose. The survival rates for breast cancer in men largely depend on how far the cancer has spread before it's diagnosed. Breast cancer diagnosed at an early stage can often be treated successfully, but effective treatment is more difficult if the cancer has spread beyond the breast tissue. Unfortunately, many cases are diagnosed after the cancer has already started to spread. Read more about diagnosing breast cancer in men. Reducing your risk The most effective way of reducing your risk of developing breast cancer, as well as other serious health conditions, is to: drink alcohol in moderation \u2013 men are advised to drink no more than 14 units of alcohol a week; a unit is approximately half a pint of normal-strength lager or a single measure (25ml) of spirits maintain a healthy weight \u2013 through a combination of eating a healthy diet and exercising regularly Read more about preventing cancer. Page last reviewed: 24\/03\/2015 Next review due: 24\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 97 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful One for the Boys: an introduction Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. One for the Boys is a male cancer awareness campaign. In this video Samuel L. Jackson, actor and chairman of the campaign, describes why it is important to raise awareness and talk about cancer. One for the Boys arms men with the facts and the tools they need to tackle cancer head on. Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer prevention Living with cancer Men's health 60-plus Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes External links Breast Cancer Care: breast cancer in men Breast Cancer Now Cancer Research UK: breast cancer in men Macmillan: breast cancer in men Men's Health Forum My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Community content from HealthUnlocked Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes Does cancer run in your family? Read about getting tested for the altered BRCA1 and other cancer risk genes Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cervical cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-cervix","content":"Cervical cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cervical cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-cervix Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-cervix Community Cervical cancer Cancer-of-the-cervix Symptoms Cancer-of-the-cervix Causes Cancer-of-the-cervix Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-cervix Treatment Cancer-of-the-cervix Complications Cancer-of-the-cervix Living with Cancer-of-the-cervix Prevention Introduction  Cervical cancer is a type of cancer that develops in a woman's cervix (the entrance to the womb from the vagina). Cancer of the cervix often has no symptoms in its early stages. If you do have symptoms, the most common is unusual vaginal bleeding, which can occur after sex, in between periods or after the menopause. Abnormal bleeding doesn't mean that you definitely have cervical cancer, but it should be investigated by your GP as soon as possible. If your GP thinks you might have cervical cancer, you should be referred to see a specialist within two weeks. Read more about the symptoms of cervical cancer and diagnosing cervical cancer. Screening for cervical cancer Over the course of many years, the cells lining the surface of the cervix undergo a series of changes. In rare cases, these precancerous cells can become cancerous. However, cell changes in the cervix can be detected at a very early stage and treatment can reduce the risk of cervical cancer developing. The NHS offers a cervical screening programme to all women from the age of 25. During cervical screening (previously known as a \"smear test\"), a small sample of cells is taken from the cervix and checked under a microscope for abnormalities. An abnormal cervical screening test doesn't mean you definitely have cancer. Most abnormal results are caused by an infection or the presence of treatable precancerous cells, rather than cancer itself. Women aged 25 to 49 years of age are offered screening every three years, and women aged 50 to 64 are offered screening every five years. For women who are 65 or older, only those who haven't been screened since they were 50, or those who have had recent abnormal tests, are offered screening. You should be sent a letter confirming when your screening appointment is due. Contact your GP if you think you may be overdue for a screening appointment. Read more about cervical screening. What causes cervical cancer? Almost all cases of cervical cancer are caused by the human papilloma virus (HPV). HPV is a very common virus that can be passed on through any type of sexual contact with a man or a woman. There are more than 100 different types of HPV, many of which are harmless. However, some types of HPV can cause abnormal changes to the cells of the cervix, which can eventually lead to cervical cancer. Two strains of the HPV virus (HPV 16 and HPV 18) are known to be responsible for 70% of all cases of cervical cancer. These types of HPV infection don't have any symptoms, so many women won't realise they have the infection. However, it's important to be aware that these infections are relatively common and most women who have them don't develop cervical cancer. Using condoms during sex offers some protection against HPV, but it can't always prevent infection, because the virus is also spread through skin-to-skin contact of the wider genital area. Since 2008, a HPV vaccine has been routinely offered to girls aged 12 and 13. Read more about the causes of cervical cancer and preventing cervical cancer. Treating cervical cancer If cervical cancer is diagnosed at an early stage, it's usually possible to treat it using surgery. In some cases, it's possible to leave the womb in place, but it may need to be removed. The surgical procedure used to remove the womb is called a hysterectomy. Radiotherapy is an alternative to surgery for some women with early stage cervical cancer. In some cases, it's used alongside surgery. More advanced cases of cervical cancer are usually treated using a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Some of the treatments used can have significant and long-lasting side effects, including early menopause and infertility. Read more about treating cervical cancer. Complications Many women with cervical cancer will have complications. These can arise as a direct result of the cancer or as a side effect of treatments such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgery. Complications associated with cervical cancer can range from the relatively minor, such as minor bleeding from the vagina or having to urinate frequently, to life-threatening, such as severe bleeding or kidney failure. Read more about the complications of cervical cancer. Outlook The stage at which cervical cancer is diagnosed is an important factor in determining a woman's outlook. The staging, given as a number from one to four, indicates how far the cancer has spread. The chances of living for at least five years after being diagnosed with cervical cancer are: stage 1 \u2013 80-99% stage 2 \u2013 60-90% stage 3 \u2013 30-50% stage 4 \u2013 20% Read more about the staging of cervical cancer. In the UK, just under 1,000 women die from cervical cancer every year. Who's affected by cervical cancer? Following the success of the NHS Cervical Screening Programme and the early detection of cell changes, the number of cervical cancer cases in the UK has reduced. Around 3,000 cases of cervical cancer are diagnosed in the UK each year. It's possible for women of all ages to develop cervical cancer, but the condition mainly affects sexually active women aged between 30 and 45. Cervical cancer is very rare in women under 25. Page last reviewed: 30\/04\/2015 Next review due: 30\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 284 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 151  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cervical screening HPV vaccination Find cancer support services for women Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: cervical cancer Jo's Cervical Cancer Trust My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services The Eve Appeal: cervical cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked Cervical screening Cervical screening is a way of detecting abnormal cells on a woman's cervix (the entrance to the womb from the vagina) HPV vaccination Why it's recommended teenage girls have the HPV (cervical cancer) vaccine Cervical cancer community Access Jo's Cervical Cancer Trust online forum and take part in the discussion Find and choose services for Cervical cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chemotherapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chemotherapy","content":"Chemotherapy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chemotherapy    Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chemotherapy Clinical trials Chemotherapy Chemotherapy Who can use it Chemotherapy What happens Chemotherapy Side effects Introduction  Chemotherapy is a type of cancer treatment, with medicine used to kill cancer cells.  It kills the cancer cells by damaging them, so they can't reproduce and spread. Why chemotherapy is used Chemotherapy is used if a cancer has spread or if there's a risk that it will. The main aim of treatment may be: to try to cure cancer completely \u2013 this is known as curative chemotherapy to help make other treatments more effective \u2013 for example, chemotherapy can be combined with radiotherapy (where radiation is used to kill cancerous cells), or it can be used before surgery to reduce the risk of the cancer returning after radiotherapy or surgery  to relieve symptoms \u2013 a cure may not be possible for advanced cancer, but chemotherapy may be used to relieve the symptoms and slow it down; this is known as palliative chemotherapy Less commonly, chemotherapy is used to treat non-cancerous conditions. For example, low doses have been used to treat lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. How chemotherapy is used There are many different types of chemotherapy medication, but they all work in much the same way. Depending on the type of cancer you have, you may be treated with one medicine (monotherapy) or with a combination of medicines (combination therapy). There are several ways in which chemotherapy medication can be given, including tablets and injections directly into a vein. The team caring for you will help come up with a treatment plan for your specific circumstances. Read more about how chemotherapy is carried out and who can use chemotherapy. Side effects Even though chemotherapy is often effective at treating cancer or relieving its symptoms, it does cause side effects. The medicines used in chemotherapy can't distinguish between fast-growing cancer cells and other types of fast-growing cells, such as blood cells, skin cells and the cells inside the stomach. This means that most chemotherapy medications have a poisonous effect on the body's cells, causing problems including: feeling tired and weak all the time feeling and being sick  hair loss  Some people only have minimal side effects, but for most people, a course of chemotherapy can be unpleasant and upsetting. Living with and adapting to the side effects of chemotherapy can be challenging. However, it's important to realise that most, if not all, side effects will disappear once the treatment is complete. There is no risk of the side effects of chemotherapy being passed to other people, including children and pregnant women, if they are in close contact with someone having chemotherapy. Read more about the possible side effects of chemotherapy. Targeted therapies In the past, any medication used to treat cancer was regarded as chemotherapy. However, over the last 20 years, new types of medication that work in a different way to chemotherapy have been introduced. These new types of medication are known as targeted therapies. This is because they're designed to target and disrupt one or more of the biological processes that cancerous cells use to grow and reproduce. In contrast, chemotherapy medications are designed to have a poisonous effect on cancerous cells. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS organisations that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population that they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for breast cancer, bowel cancer and lung cancer survival (PDF, 900 Kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 20\/02\/2015 Next review due: 20\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 381 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Common questions about cancer Depression Find cancer support services Guide to caring Living with cancer Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: chemotherapy Macmillan: chemotherapy Macmillan: how others can help My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Yellow Card Scheme Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Flu and the flu vaccine Your guide to flu symptoms and the flu vaccine, including who should be vaccinated this winter NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colon, rectum or bowel cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel","content":"Bowel cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bowel cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Real stories Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Community Bowel cancer Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Symptoms Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Causes Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Treatment Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Living with Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Prevention Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Screening Introduction  Bowel cancer is a general term for cancer that begins in the large bowel. Depending on where the cancer starts, bowel cancer is sometimes called colon or rectal cancer. Cancer can sometimes start in the small bowel (small intestine), but small bowel cancer is much rarer than large bowel cancer. Bowel cancer is one of the most common types of cancer diagnosed in the UK, with around 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. About 1 in every 20 people in the UK will develop bowel cancer in their lifetime. Signs and symptoms The three main symptoms of bowel cancer are blood in the stools (faeces), changes in bowel habit \u2013 such as more frequent, looser stools \u2013 and abdominal (tummy) pain. However, these symptoms are very common and most people with them do not have bowel cancer. For example, blood in the stools is more often caused by haemorrhoids (piles), and a change in bowel habit or abdominal pain is usually the result of something you have eaten. As almost 9 out of 10 people with bowel cancer are over the age of 60, these symptoms are more important as people get older. They are also more significant when they persist despite simple treatments. Most people who are eventually diagnosed with bowel cancer have one of the following combination of symptoms: a persistent change in bowel habit that causes them to go to the toilet more often and pass looser stools, usually together with blood on or in their stools a persistent change in bowel habit without blood in their stools, but with abdominal pain blood in the stools without other haemorrhoid symptoms, such as soreness, discomfort, pain, itching or a lump hanging down outside the back passage abdominal pain, discomfort or bloating always provoked by eating, sometimes resulting in a reduction in the amount of food eaten and weight loss The symptoms of bowel cancer can be subtle and don't necessarily make you feel ill. Read more about the symptoms of bowel cancer. When to seek medical advice Try the bowel cancer symptom checker for advice on treatments you can try to see if your symptoms get better, and when you should see your GP to discuss whether any tests are necessary. Your doctor will probably carry out a simple examination of your tummy and bottom to make sure you have no lumps. They may also arrange for a simple blood test to check for iron deficiency anaemia \u2013 this can indicate whether there is any bleeding from your bowel that you haven't been aware of. In some cases, your doctor may decide it is best for you to have a simple test in hospital to make sure there is no serious cause for your symptoms. Make sure you return to your doctor if your symptoms persist or keep coming back after stopping treatment, regardless of their severity or your age. Read more about diagnosing bowel cancer. Who's at risk? It's not known exactly what causes bowel cancer, but there are a number of things that can increase your risk. These include: age \u2013 almost 9 in 10 cases of bowel cancer occur in people aged 60 or over diet \u2013 a diet high in red or processed meats and low in fibre can increase your risk weight \u2013 bowel cancer is more common in people who are overweight or obese exercise \u2013 being inactive increases the risk of getting bowel cancer alcohol and smoking \u2013 a high alcohol intake and smoking may increase your chances of getting bowel cancer family history \u2013 having a close relative (mother or father, brother or sister) who developed bowel cancer under the age of 50 puts you at a greater lifetime risk of developing the condition Some people have an increased risk of bowel cancer because they have another condition that affects their bowel, such as severe ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, over a long period of time. Read more about the causes of bowel cancer and preventing bowel cancer. Bowel cancer screening To detect cases of bowel cancer sooner, the NHS offers two types of bowel cancer screening to adults registered with a GP in England: faecal occult blood (FOB) test \u2013 all men and women aged 60 to 74 are invited to carry out an FOB test at home. They're sent the home test kit every two years through the post until they reach the age of 74. The FOB test checks for the presence of blood in a stool sample, which could be an early sign of bowel cancer. bowel scope screening \u2013 this additional one-off test is being gradually introduced in England. It is offered to men and women at the age of 55. As of March 2015, about two-thirds of screening centres were beginning to offer this test to 55-year-olds. It involves a doctor or nurse using a thin, flexible instrument to look inside the lower part of the bowel and remove any small growths called polyps, which could eventually turn into cancer. Screening plays an important part in the fight against bowel cancer as it can help detect bowel cancer before it causes obvious symptoms, which increases the chances of people surviving the condition. Read more about screening for bowel cancer. Treatment and outlook Bowel cancer can be treated using a combination of different treatments, depending on where the cancer is in your bowel and how far it has spread. The main treatments are: surgery \u2013 the cancerous section of bowel is removed; it is the most effective way of curing bowel cancer, and is all that many people need chemotherapy \u2013 where medication is used to kill cancer cells  radiotherapy \u2013 where radiation is used to kill cancer cells biological treatments \u2013 a newer type of medication that increases the effectiveness of chemotherapy and prevents the cancer spreading As with most types of cancer, the chances of a complete cure depends on how far it has advanced by the time it is diagnosed. If the cancer is confined to the bowel, surgery will usually be able to completely remove it. Overall, 7 to 8 in every 10 people with bowel cancer will live at least one year after diagnosis. More than half of those diagnosed will live at least another 10 years. Every year, around 16,000 people die as a result of bowel cancer. Read more about how bowel cancer is treated and living with bowel cancer. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS bodies that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for bowel cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 788 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 389  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 193  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_63\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Bowel cancer screening Bowel cancer and red meat risk Bowel polyps Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Beating Bowel Cancer Bowel Cancer Information Bowel Cancer UK Cancer Research UK healthtalk.org: colorectal cancer Macmillan Cancer Support My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Bowel Cancer Screening NHS cancer screening There are some types of cancers you can get free routine screening for NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cyanosis (blue-tinged skin\/lips)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cyanosis","content":"Blue skin and lips (cyanosis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blue skin and lips (cyanosis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Blue skin and lips (cyanosis) Introduction  If a person's skin or lips turn blue, it's usually caused by low blood oxygen levels or poor circulation. It can be a sign of a serious problem, so it's important to seek medical advice. When blood becomes depleted of oxygen, it changes from bright red to darker in colour, and it's this that makes the skin and lips look blue. In darker-skinned people, the blue tinge may be easier to spot in the lips, gums and around the eyes. The medical name for this blue tinge is cyanosis. What to do Call 999 or go to your nearest hospital emergency department (A&E) immediately if you notice an adult or child suddenly turning blue, particularly if they have other symptoms, such as difficulty breathing or chest pain. This could be a sign of a life-threatening problem. See your GP or call NHS 111 if you have cyanosis that comes on very gradually, or affects just the fingers, hands, toes or feet. This is usually the result of a less serious problem with blood circulation, but it should still be checked by a doctor. Common causes of cyanosis Some of the main causes of cyanosis are described below, but you shouldn't use this to diagnose yourself \u2013 always leave that to a doctor. Cyanosis that just affects the hands, feet or limbs If just the fingers, toes or limbs have turned blue and feel cold, it's known as \"peripheral cyanosis\". The cause is usually poor circulation resulting from: Raynaud's phenomenon \u2013 where the blood supply to certain parts of the body, usually the fingers and toes, becomes temporarily reduced when exposed to cold temperatures peripheral arterial disease (PAD) \u2013 where a build-up of fatty deposits in the arteries restricts blood supply to the legs beta-blockers \u2013 medication commonly used to treat high blood pressure a blood clot blocking the blood supply to or from a limb Cyanosis that affects the skin generally and\/or lips When all the skin and\/or lips have a blue tinge, it's known as \"central cyanosis\" and is usually a sign of low levels of oxygen in the blood. Common causes for central cyanosis are listed below. A problem with the lungs: worsening of a long-term lung condition, such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) lung infections, such as pneumonia, bronchiolitis or whooping cough bronchiectasis \u2013 where the airways in the lungs become abnormally widened a pulmonary embolism \u2013 a blood clot in the arteries of the lungs neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS) or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) \u2013 where the lungs can't provide enough oxygen for the rest of the body drowning or nearly drowning A problem with the airways: choking \u2013 read what to do if someone is choking croup \u2013 a childhood condition, usually caused by a virus, that affects the airways and causes a barking cough epiglottitis \u2013 inflammation and swelling of the flap of tissue at the back of the throat, usually caused by infection anaphylaxis \u2013 a severe allergic reaction that can restrict the airways A problem with the heart: heart failure \u2013 where the heart fails to pump enough blood around the body congenital heart disease \u2013 a heart defect present at birth that can affect how blood travels around the heart and body cardiac arrest \u2013 where the heart stops beating Other causes: exposure to cold air or water being at high altitude seizures (fits) that last a long time a problem with the blood, such as abnormal haemoglobin (which means the blood cannot take up enough oxygen) or polycythaemia (a high concentration of red blood cells) Page last reviewed: 29\/05\/2015 Next review due: 29\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 180 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Find your nearest A&E department Breathing difficulties Does your child have a serious illness? External links Asthma UK British Lung Foundation Shortness of breath Why you should see a doctor if you're feeling breathless Asthma attack: what you need to do What to do in an asthma attack, including how to spot the warning signs and having a personal action plan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Endometrial cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-uterus","content":""},{"name":"Eye cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-eye","content":"Eye cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Eye cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cancer-of-the-eye Clinical trials Eye cancer Introduction  Between 500 and 600 cases of eye cancer (ocular cancer) are diagnosed in the UK each year. There are a number of different types of cancer that affect the eyes, including: eye melanoma squamous cell carcinoma lymphoma retinoblastoma \u2013 a childhood cancer Cancer can also sometimes develop in the tissues surrounding your eyeball or spread to the eye from other parts of the body, such as the lungs or breasts. This topic focuses on melanoma of the eye, one of the most common types of eye cancer. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the other types of eye cancer. This page covers: Symptoms of eye cancer About melanoma of the eye What causes eye melanoma? Diagnosing melanoma of the eye Treatments for eye melanoma Outlook for eye melanoma Symptoms of eye cancer Eye cancer doesn't always cause obvious symptoms and may only be picked up during a routine eye test. Symptoms of eye cancer can include: shadows, flashes of light, or wiggly lines in your vision blurred vision a dark patch in your eye that's getting bigger partial or total loss of vision bulging of one eye a lump on your eyelid or in your eye that's increasing in size pain in or around your eye, although this is rare These symptoms can also be caused by more minor eye conditions, so they're not necessarily a sign of cancer. However, it's important to get the symptoms checked by a doctor as soon as possible. Melanoma of the eye Melanoma is cancer that develops from pigment-producing cells called melanocytes. Most melanomas develop in the skin, but it's also possible for them to occur in other parts of the body, including the eye. Eye melanoma most commonly affects the eyeball. Doctors sometimes call it uveal or choroidal melanoma, depending on exactly which part of your eye is affected. It can also affect the conjunctiva, the thin layer that covers the front of the eye, or the eyelid. What causes eye melanoma? Eye melanoma occurs when the pigment-producing cells in the eyes divide and multiply too rapidly. This produces a lump of tissue known as a tumour. It's not clear exactly why this occurs, but the following factors may increase the risk of it happening: lighter eye colour \u2013 if you have blue, grey or green eyes, you have a higher risk of developing eye melanoma compared with people who have brown eyes white or pale skin \u2013 eye melanoma mostly affects white people and is more common in those with fair skin unusual moles \u2013 if you have irregularly shaped or unusually coloured moles, you're more at risk of developing skin cancer and eye melanoma use of sunbeds \u2013 there's some evidence to suggest that exposing yourself to ultraviolet (UV) radiation from sunbeds, for example, can increase your risk of eye melanoma overexposure to sunlight \u2013 this increases your risk of skin cancer, and may also be a risk factor for eye melanoma The risk of developing eye melanoma also increases with age, with most cases being diagnosed in people in their 50s. Read about the risk factors for other types of eye cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. Diagnosing melanoma of the eye If your GP or optician (optometrist) suspects you have a serious problem with your eyes, they will refer you to a specialist eye doctor called an ophthalmologist for an assessment. If they suspect you have melanoma of the eye, they'll refer you to a specialist centre for eye cancer. There are four centres in the UK, located in London, Sheffield, Liverpool, and Glasgow. It's likely you'll have a number of different tests at the centre, including: an eye examination \u2013 to look at the structures of your eyes in more detail and check for abnormalities an ultrasound scan of your eye \u2013 a small probe placed over your closed eye uses high-frequency sound waves to create an image of the inside of your eye; this allows your doctor to find out more about the position of the tumour and its size a fluorescein angiogram \u2013 where photographs of the suspected cancer are taken using a special camera after dye has been injected into your bloodstream to highlight the tumour Occasionally, a thin needle may be used to remove a small sample of cells from the tumour (biopsy). The genetic information in these cells is analysed to give an indication of the chances of the cancer spreading or coming back. Treatments for eye melanoma Treatment for melanoma of the eye depends on the size and location of the tumour. Your care team will explain each treatment option in detail, including the benefits and any potential complications. Treatment will aim to conserve the affected eye whenever possible. The main treatments for eye melanoma are: brachytherapy \u2013 tiny plates lined with radioactive material called plaques are inserted near the tumour and left in place for up to a week to kill the cancerous cells external radiotherapy \u2013 a machine is used to carefully aim beams of radiation at the tumour to kill the cancerous cells surgery to remove the tumour or part of the eye \u2013 this may be possible if the tumour is small and you still have some vision in your eye removal of the eye (enucleation) \u2013 this may be necessary if the tumour is large or you've lost your vision; the eye will eventually be replaced with an artificial eye that matches your other eye Chemotherapy is rarely used for eye melanoma, but may be suitable for other types of eye cancer. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the treatment options for eye cancer and the types of eye cancer surgery. Outlook for eye melanoma The outlook for melanoma of the eye depends on how big the cancer is at the time it's diagnosed and exactly which parts of the eye are affected. Overall: about 8 out of every 10 people (80%) diagnosed with a small eye melanoma will live for at least five years after diagnosis about 7 out of every 10 people (70%) diagnosed with a medium-sized eye melanoma will live for at least five years after diagnosis about 5 out of every 10 people (50%) diagnosed with a large eye melanoma will live for at least five years after diagnosis The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the stages of eye cancer and statistics and outlook for eye cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/03\/2016 Next review due: 02\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 49 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coping with a cancer diagnosis Living with cancer Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: eye cancer Macmillan: ocular melanoma Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Radiotherapy Radiotherapy uses controlled doses of high-energy radiation to destroy cancer cells NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find cancer support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=Cancer","content":"Find Cancer information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Cancer information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Gallbladder cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Gallbladder-cancer","content":"Gallbladder cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Gallbladder cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Gallbladder-cancer Clinical trials Gallbladder cancer Introduction  Gallbladder cancer is very rare. Around 800 people in the UK are diagnosed with the condition each year. There are a number of different types of gallbladder cancer, depending on the cells affected. Over 85% of gallbladder cancers are adenocarcinoma, which means the cancer started in the gland cells lining the gallbladder. Cancer that starts in the skin-like cells that line the gallbladder is known as squamous cell cancer. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the different types of gallbladder cancer. Cancer of the gallbladder is more common in women than men, with around 7 out of 10 cases diagnosed in women. It's also more common in older people, particularly those over 70 years of age. The gallbladder The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped organ that's located underneath the liver. It's main purpose is to store and concentrate bile. Bile is a liquid produced by the liver that helps to digest fats. It passes from the liver through a series of channels (bile ducts) into the gallbladder, where it's stored. Over time, bile becomes more concentrated, which makes it better at digesting fats. The gallbladder releases bile into the digestive system when it's needed. The gallbladder is a useful but not essential organ, which can be safely removed without interfering with your ability to digest food. Symptoms of gallbladder cancer In the early stages, gallbladder cancer doesn't cause symptoms, which means it could be at an advanced stage by the time it's diagnosed. Symptoms that occur at a later stage can include: abdominal (stomach) pain feeling sick jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes) These symptoms could be linked to a number of conditions and may not be related to gallbladder cancer. However, if you have these symptoms, you should visit your GP so they can investigate what's causing them. Other possible symptoms of gallbladder cancer can include loss of appetite, unexplained weight loss and a swollen stomach. What causes gallbladder cancer? In gallbladder cancer, abnormal cells grow within the gallbladder. It's not known why this happens, but certain things are thought to increase your chances of developing the condition. Gallbladder cancer is more common in older people, and your chances of developing it increase with age. In the UK, most cases occur in people over the age of 70. Lifestyle factors \u2013 such as obesity, smoking and an unhealthy diet \u2013 are believed to increase the risk of gallbladder cancer. However, there's not enough evidence to show a firm link between diet and gallbladder cancer. There are also a number of conditions that can increase your chances of developing gallbladder cancer. For example, gallstones, cholecystitis (inflammation of the gallbladder) and diabetes have been closely linked to the condition. If you have a family history of gallstones, cholecystitis, or gallbladder cancer, you're more likely to develop these conditions yourself. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the risks and causes of gallbladder cancer. Diagnosing gallbladder cancer Your GP will examine you and ask about your symptoms. If they suspect gallbladder cancer, they may refer you to a specialist, usually a gastroenterologist (a doctor who specialises in conditions of the digestive system). The specialist will ask about your medical history and check to see whether the lymph glands in your neck and groin are swollen. You may also have some initial tests, including: blood tests an ultrasound scan a computerised tomography (CT) scan If these tests reveal anything abnormal in or around your gallbladder, further tests may be arranged to help confirm whether you have gallbladder cancer. These may include: an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) a magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) biopsy and fine needle aspiration (FNA) The Cancer Research UK website has more information about tests for gallbladder cancer. Treating gallbladder cancer The main treatment for gallbladder cancer is surgery to remove the gallbladder and possibly some of the surrounding tissue. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are also sometimes used, either on their own or in combination with surgery. The treatment programme that's most suitable for you will depend on: the type of gallbladder cancer you have the stage of your cancer your overall level of health As with all cancers, the chances of survival depend on how far the condition has advanced when it is diagnosed. For example, if the cancerous cells are confined to the gallbladder lining, your chances of living for more than five years are good (about 80%). However, if gallbladder cancer has spread into the surrounding tissue or lymph nodes, your chances of living for at least five years are much lower (30%). The Cancer Research UK website has more information about treating gallbladder cancer and the stages and outlook for gallbladder cancer.  1. Liver 2. Gallbladder 3. Bile duct 4. Bile enters duodenum 5. Stomach What is cancer? The body is made up of millions of different types of cells. Cancer occurs when some of the cells grow and multiply in an abnormal way. When cancer affects organs and solid tissues, it causes a growth called a tumour to form. Cancer can occur in any part of the body where the cells multiply abnormally. Community content from HealthUnlocked Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Page last reviewed: 12\/11\/2014 Next review due: 12\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 51 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acute cholecystitis Cancer Care and support Find cancer support services Gallbladder removal Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: gallbladder cancer Macmillan Cancer Support: gallbladder cancer My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Jaundice Jaundice is caused by a build-up of bilirubin in the blood and tissues. It makes the skin and whites of the eyes yellow Acute cholecystitis Acute cholecystitis is inflammation of the gallbladder. It is a potentially serious condition that usually needs to be treated in hospital Radiotherapy Radiotherapy uses controlled doses of high-energy radiation to destroy cancer cells Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a treatment for cancer where medication is used to kill cancerous cells. Find out more about its effects NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Head and neck cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-head-and-neck","content":"Head and neck cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Head and neck cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cancer-of-the-head-and-neck Clinical trials Head and neck cancer   Head and neck cancer is a relatively uncommon type of cancer. Around 10,000 new cases are diagnosed in the UK each year. There are more than 30 areas within the head and neck where cancer can develop, including the: mouth (including the lips) voice box (larynx) throat (pharynx)  salivary glands nose and sinuses area at the back of the nose and mouth (nasopharynx) Oesophageal (gullet) cancer, thyroid cancer, brain tumours and eye cancer don't tend to be classified as a head and neck cancer. Mouth cancer Mouth cancer is the most common type of head and neck cancer. It can affect a number of areas in and around the mouth, including the: lips tongue inside of the cheeks floor or roof of the mouth gums Symptoms of mouth cancer can include persistent mouth ulcers and\/or a lump in your mouth, both of which may be painful.  Read more about mouth cancer. Laryngeal cancer Laryngeal cancer develops in the tissue of the larynx (voice box). Symptoms of laryngeal cancer can include: a change in the voice, such as persistent hoarseness difficulty or pain when swallowing noisy breathing shortness of breath a persistent cough a lump or swelling in your neck Read more about laryngeal cancer. Throat cancers Doctors don't tend to use the term \"throat cancer\", as the throat (pharynx) includes many different parts that can be affected by cancer. The main areas that can be affected are the: oropharynx \u2013 the part of the throat at the back of the mouth hypopharynx \u2013 the part of the throat connecting the oropharynx to the gullet and windpipe nasopharynx \u2013 the part of the throat that connects the back of the nose to the back of the mouth (see below) The most common symptoms of cancer in the oropharynx or hypopharynx include a lump in the neck, a persistent sore throat and difficulty swallowing. Macmillan Cancer Support has more information about oropharyngeal cancer. Salivary gland cancer Salivary glands produce saliva, which keeps your mouth moist and helps with swallowing and digestion. There are three main pairs of salivary glands. They are the: parotid glands \u2013 located between your cheeks and your ears sublingual glands \u2013 located under your tongue submandibular glands \u2013 located under each side of your jawbone Salivary gland cancer most commonly affects the parotid glands. The main symptom of salivary gland cancer is a lump or swelling on or near your jaw, or in your mouth or neck, although the vast majority of these lumps are non-cancerous. Other symptoms can include numbness in part of your face and drooping on one side of your face. To read more about salivary gland cancer, visit Cancer Research UK and Macmillan Cancer Support. Nose and sinus cancer Nose and sinus cancer affects the nasal cavity (above the roof of your mouth) and the sinuses (the small, air-filled cavities inside the bones of the nose and within the cheekbones and forehead). The symptoms of nose and sinus cancer are similar to viral or bacterial infections, such as the common cold or sinusitis, and include: a persistent blocked nose, which usually only affects one side nosebleeds a decreased sense of smell mucus running from the nose or down the throat Read more about nose and sinus cancer. Nasopharyngeal cancer Nasopharyngeal cancer affects the part of the throat that connects the back of the nose to the back of the mouth. It's one of the rarest types of head and neck cancer in the UK. Symptoms can include: a lump in the neck, due to the cancer spreading to the lymph nodes (pea-sized lumps of tissue that make up part of the immune system) in the neck a blocked or stuffy nose nosebleeds hearing loss (usually only in one ear) Read more about nasopharyngeal cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/10\/2015 Next review due: 12\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 40 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Mouth cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Carrie Newlands, consultant oral and maxillofacial surgeon, talks about the causes and symptoms of mouth cancer. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Find cancer support services Laryngeal cancer Mouth cancer Nasopharyngeal cancer Nose and sinus cancer Thryoid cancer External links Cancer Research UK: head and neck cancer Macmillan: head and neck cancer The National Association of Laryngectomee Clubs Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Find cancer information and support Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Kidney cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-kidney","content":"Kidney cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Kidney cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-kidney Lifestyle Cancer-of-the-kidney Clinical trials Kidney cancer Cancer-of-the-kidney Symptoms Cancer-of-the-kidney Causes Cancer-of-the-kidney Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-kidney Treatment Cancer-of-the-kidney Prevention Introduction  Kidney cancer is the eighth most common cancer in adults in the UK, with just over 10,100 people diagnosed each year. Signs and symptoms of kidney cancer can include: blood in your urine  a constant pain in your side, just below the ribs a lump or swelling in the kidney area (on either side of the body) See your GP as soon as possible if you experience any of these symptoms. They will examine you and may refer you to a specialist clinic for further tests. In around half of all cases of kidney cancer there are no symptoms, and the condition is detected during tests for other unrelated conditions. Read more about the symptoms of kidney cancer and diagnosing kidney cancer. The kidneys and cancer The kidneys are two bean-shaped organs located on either side of the body, just underneath the ribcage. Their main role is to filter out waste products from the blood, in addition to producing urine. Only one of the kidneys is usually affected by cancer. The human body is made up of billions of cells, which normally grow and multiply in an orderly way, with new cells being created only when and where they're needed. In cancer, this orderly process goes wrong and cells begin to grow and multiply uncontrollably. Exactly what triggers this growth is unknown; however, there are certain risk factors that can increase the chances of the condition developing, such as smoking and obesity. Kidney cancer most frequently affects people over 50 years of age and is more common among men. Read more about the causes of kidney cancer. Types of kidney cancer Many different types of cancer can affect the kidneys. The most common type is renal cell carcinoma (RCC), which accounts for more than 80% of all kidney cancers. Rarer types of kidney cancer include: transitional cell cancer \u2013 develops in the lining of the kidneys and usually affects men who are 50 years of age or over Wilms\u2019 tumour \u2013 a rare type of kidney cancer that affects children This topic focuses on RCC. See the Cancer Research UK website for more information about transitional cell cancer and Wilms\u2019 tumour. Treating kidney cancer The earlier kidney cancer is diagnosed, the easier it is to treat. How it's treated will depend on the size and spread of the cancer. Surgery to remove the cancerous cells is usually the first course of action. Unlike most other cancers, chemotherapy isn't very effective at treating kidney cancer. However, non-surgical treatments are available, such as radiotherapy or targeted therapies. These are most commonly used in the more advanced stages of kidney cancer, when the cancer has spread beyond the kidney. Read more about treating kidney cancer. Preventing kidney cancer As the causes of kidney cancer aren't fully understood, it's not possible to fully prevent it. However, leading a healthy lifestyle may reduce the chances of developing the condition. A combination of a healthy diet and regular exercise will help to avoid becoming overweight or obese, which is a significant risk factor for kidney cancer. If you're overweight or obese, you can lose weight and maintain a healthy weight by combining regular exercise with a calorie-controlled diet. Read more about treating obesity. Outlook The outlook for kidney cancer is usually good if the condition is diagnosed in its early stages, when the cancer is still contained inside the kidney. Kidney cancer can often be completely cured by removing some or all of the kidney. This is because it's possible to live a healthy life with only one kidney. Around one in three cases of kidney cancer are diagnosed at an early stage. Depending on how aggressive the cancer is, 65-90% of people will live at least five years after receiving an early diagnosis of kidney cancer, with many people living much longer. The outlook for kidney cancer that's spread outside the kidney is less favourable. Around 40-70% of people with this stage of kidney cancer will live at least five years after receiving a diagnosis. In cases where kidney cancer is advanced and has spread to other parts of the body, only around 10% of people will live for at least five years after receiving a diagnosis. What do our kidneys do? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. The kidneys filter waste products from the blood before turning it to urine. This video explains in detail how the kidneys function. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Living with kidney cancer Kidney cancer can affect your daily life in different ways, depending on what stage it's at and what treatment you're having. How people cope with their diagnosis and treatment varies from person to person. Read more about living with cancer. Advice and support is also available if you need it from the organisations listed below: Macmillan cancer support  Kidney Cancer UK  Kidney cancer support network James Whale Fund for Kidney Cancer  Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Page last reviewed: 17\/10\/2014 Next review due: 17\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 221 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 115  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Call your GP today If you notice blood in your pee, even if it\u2019s \u2018just the once\u2019, tell your doctor. Call your GP today Useful links NHS Choices links Acute kidney injury Care and support Chemotherapy Chronic kidney disease Find cancer support services Kidney health Living with cancer Radiotherapy External links British Renal Society James Whale Fund for Kidney Cancer Kidney Cancer UK Kidney patient guide Kidney Research UK Macmillan Cancer Support National Kidney Federation Renal Association My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Kidney health Find out about how to look after your kidneys and whether you need to have them checked Preventing cancer How to reduce your risk of cancer, including stopping smoking, healthy eating and checking your body for change Find and choose services for Kidney cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Laryngeal (larynx) cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-larynx","content":"Laryngeal (larynx) cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Laryngeal (larynx) cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-larynx Clinical trials Laryngeal cancer Cancer-of-the-larynx Causes Cancer-of-the-larynx Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-larynx Treatment Cancer-of-the-larynx Recovery Cancer-of-the-larynx Prevention Introduction  Laryngeal cancer is a type of cancer that affects the larynx (voice box). The larynx is part of the throat found at the entrance of the windpipe (trachea). It plays an important role in helping you breathe and speak. In the UK, there are about 2,400 new cases of laryngeal cancer each year. The condition is more common in people over the age of 60. It's about four times more common in men than women. Symptoms of laryngeal cancer The main symptoms of laryngeal cancer include: a change in your voice, such as sounding hoarse pain when swallowing or difficulty swallowing  a lump or swelling in your neck a long-lasting cough a persistent sore throat or earache in severe cases, difficulty breathing Some people may also experience bad breath, breathlessness, a high-pitched wheezing noise when breathing, unexplained weight loss, or fatigue (extreme tiredness). When to see your GP You should visit your GP if you have had any of the main symptoms listed above for more than three weeks. These symptoms are often caused by less serious conditions, such as laryngitis, but it's a good idea to get them checked out. If necessary, your GP can refer you to a hospital specialist for further tests to confirm or rule out cancer. Read more about diagnosing laryngeal cancer. What causes laryngeal cancer? It's not clear exactly what causes laryngeal cancer, but your risk of getting the condition is increased by: smoking tobacco regularly drinking large amounts of alcohol having a family history of head and neck cancer having an unhealthy diet exposure to certain chemicals and substances, such as asbestos and coal dust By adopting a healthy lifestyle, including avoiding alcohol and tobacco, you can significantly reduce your chances of developing laryngeal cancer. Read more about the causes of laryngeal cancer and preventing laryngeal cancer. How laryngeal cancer is treated The main treatments for laryngeal cancer are radiotherapy, surgery and chemotherapy. Radiotherapy or surgery to remove the cancerous cells from the larynx can often cure laryngeal cancer if it's diagnosed early. If the cancer is advanced, a combination of surgery to remove part or all of the larynx, radiotherapy and chemotherapy can be used. If you have surgery to remove your larynx, you'll no longer be able to speak or breathe in the usual way. Instead, you will breathe through a permanent hole in your neck (stoma) and you will need additional treatment to help restore your voice. This may include an implant in your throat, or an electrical device you hold against your throat to produce sound. Read more about treating laryngeal cancer and recovering from laryngeal cancer surgery. Outlook The outlook for laryngeal cancer depends on the extent of the cancer when it's diagnosed and treated. Fortunately, most laryngeal cancers are diagnosed at an early stage, which means the outlook is generally better than some other types of cancer. Overall, about 70 out of every 100 people will live for at least 5 years after diagnosis and about 60 out of every 100 people will live for at least 10 years. If you smoke, stopping smoking after being diagnosed with laryngeal cancer may improve your outlook. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 07\/08\/2015 Next review due: 07\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 135 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Find cancer support services Protect yourself against cancer Radiotherapy External links Cancer Laryngectomee Trust Cancer Research UK: laryngeal cancer Macmillan: laryngeal cancer National Association of Laryngectomee Clubs NHS Smokefree Stop smoking Help with quitting, including what your GP can do, local services and nicotine replacement therapies Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, acute lymphoblastic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic","content":"Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Real stories Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Community Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Symptoms Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Causes Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Diagnosis Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Treatment Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Complications Introduction  Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. Acute leukaemia means the condition progresses rapidly and aggressively and requires immediate treatment. Acute leukaemia is classified according to the type of white blood cells affected by cancer. There are two main types: lymphocytes, which are mostly used to fight viral infections neutrophils, which perform several functions, such as fighting bacterial infections, defending the body against parasites and preventing the spread of tissue damage  These pages focus on acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, which is cancer of the lymphocytes. The following other types of leukaemia are covered elsewhere: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia chronic myeloid leukaemia acute myeloid leukaemia Warning signs of acute leukaemia Symptoms of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia usually begin slowly before rapidly getting severe as the number of immature white blood cells in your blood increases (see below for an explanation of this). Symptoms include: pale skin tiredness breathlessness having repeated infections over a short space of time unusual and frequent bleeding Read more about the symptoms of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. What happens in acute leukaemia All of the blood cells in the body are produced by bone marrow \u2013 a spongy material found inside bones. Bone marrow produces specialised cells called stem cells which have the ability to develop into three important types of blood cells: red blood cells, which carry oxygen around the body white blood cells, which help fight infection platelets, which help stop bleeding Usually the bone marrow produces stem cells which are allowed to fully develop before being released into the blood. But in acute leukaemia, bone marrow starts releasing large numbers of immature white blood cells known as blast cells. As the number of blast cells increases there is a drop in the number of red blood cells and platelet cells. This drop causes the symptoms of anaemia, such as tiredness, and increases the risk of excessive bleeding. Also, blast cells are less effective than mature white blood cells at fighting bacteria and viruses, making you more vulnerable to infection. How common is acute lymphoblastic leukaemia? Around 8,600 people are diagnosed with leukaemia each year in the UK. In 2011, 654 people were diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Despite being uncommon overall, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia is the most common type of cancer to affect children. Approximately one in every 2,000 children will develop it. About 85% of cases occur in children aged under 15, mostly between the ages of two and five years old. The cause or causes of acute leukaemia are uncertain, but known risk factors include: exposure to high levels of radiation exposure to benzene, a chemical used in manufacturing that is also found in cigarettes Read more information about the causes of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Outlook The outlook for children with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia is usually good. Almost all children will achieve a remission (a period of time where they are free from symptoms) from their symptoms, and 85% will be completely cured. The outlook for adults with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia is less promising as only 40% of people with the condition will be completely cured. Treatments for acute lymphoblastic leukaemia usually involve a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In some cases, a bone marrow transplant may also be needed to achieve a cure. Read more about the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. If a cure is not possible, there is a risk that the lack of healthy blood cells can make the person extremely vulnerable to life-threatening infections (due to the lack of white blood cells) or uncontrolled and serious bleeding (due to the lack of platelets). Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Angela describes how she dealt with her two-year-old son's leukaemia diagnosis, and an expert explains the common symptoms and treatment options. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 18\/08\/2014 Next review due: 18\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 81 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acute myeloid leukaemia Bone marrow donation Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Chronic myeloid leukaemia Find cancer support services Stem cell and bone marrow donation External links Anthony Nolan Trust Bloodwise: blood cancer Cancer Research UK: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia Children with Cancer Leukaemia Care: patient information Macmillan: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, acute myeloid","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leukaemia-acute","content":"Acute myeloid leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Acute myeloid leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leukaemia-acute Clinical trials Leukaemia-acute Community Acute myeloid leukaemia Leukaemia-acute Symptoms Leukaemia-acute Causes Leukaemia-acute Diagnosis Leukaemia-acute Treatment Leukaemia-acute Complications Introduction  Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. Acute leukaemia means it progresses rapidly and aggressively, and usually requires immediate treatment. Acute leukaemia is classified according to the type of white blood cells affected. The two main types of white blood cells are: lymphocytes \u2013 mostly used to fight viral infections myeloid cells \u2013 which perform a number of different functions, such as fighting bacterial infections, defending the body against parasites and preventing the spread of tissue damage  This topic focuses on acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), which is an aggressive cancer of the myeloid cells. The following types of leukaemia are covered separately: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia chronic myeloid leukaemia chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Signs and symptoms of AML The symptoms of AML usually develop over a few weeks and become increasingly more severe. Symptoms can include: pale skin tiredness breathlessness frequent infections unusual and frequent bleeding, such as bleeding gums or nosebleeds In more advanced cases, AML can make you extremely vulnerable to life-threatening infections or serious internal bleeding. Read more about the complications of AML. Seeking medical advice You should see your GP if you or your child have possible symptoms of AML. Although it's highly unlikely that leukaemia is the cause, these symptoms should be investigated. If your GP thinks you may have leukaemia, they'll arrange blood tests to check your blood cell production. If the tests suggest there's a problem, you'll be urgently referred to a haematologist (a specialist in treating blood conditions) for further tests and any necessary treatment. Read more about diagnosing AML. What causes AML? AML occurs when specialised cells called stem cells, which are found in the bone marrow (a spongy material inside the bones), produce too many immature white blood cells. These immature cells are known as blast cells. Blast cells don't have the infection-fighting properties of healthy white blood cells, and producing too many can lead to a decrease in the number of red blood cells (which carry oxygen in the blood) and platelets (cells that help the blood to clot). It's not clear exactly why this happens and, in most cases, there's no identifiable cause. However, a number of factors that can increase your risk of developing AML have been identified. These include: previous chemotherapy or radiotherapy exposure to very high levels of radiation (including previous  radiotherapy treatment) exposure to benzene \u2013 a chemical used in manufacturing that's also found in cigarette smoke having an underlying blood disorder or genetic disorder, such as Down's syndrome Read more about the causes of AML. Who's affected AML is a rare type of cancer, with around 2,600 people diagnosed with it each year in the UK. The risk of developing AML increases with age. It's most common in people over 65. How AML is treated AML is an aggressive type of cancer that can develop rapidly, so treatment usually needs to begin soon after a diagnosis is confirmed. Chemotherapy is the main treatment for AML. It's used to kill as many leukaemia cells in your body as possible and reduce the risk of the condition coming back (relapsing). In some cases, intensive chemotherapy and radiotherapy may be needed, in combination with a bone marrow or stem cell transplant, to achieve a cure. Read more about treating AML. Outlook The outlook for AML largely depends on the specific type of AML you have, as well as your age and general health. There are many subtypes of AML, which are classified according to various features \u2013 such as the specific genetic changes in the leukaemia cells. Some types of AML are more challenging to treat than others. Even if treatment is initially successful, there's still a significant risk that the condition will return at some point during the next few years. If this happens, treatment may need to be repeated. A number of medical trials have suggested that almost half of those aged under 60 diagnosed with AML will live for at least five years, and in some types of AML, such as acute promyeloid leukaemia (APML), around 85% will live for at least five years. In general, the outlook for children with AML tends to be better than that of adults diagnosed with the condition. Page last reviewed: 14\/03\/2016 Next review due: 14\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 171 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia Bone marrow donation Chronic myeloid leukaemia Find cancer support services Stem cell and bone marrow transplants External links Anthony Nolan Bloodwise: childhood AML healthtalk.org: leukaemia Leukaemia Care My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions, and where to go for further help and support Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, chronic lymphocytic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic","content":"Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Clinical trials leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Community Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Diagnosis leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Treatment leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Complications   Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is a type of cancer that affects the white blood cells and tends to progress slowly over many years. It mostly affects people over the age of 60 and is rare in people under 40. Children are almost never affected. In chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), the spongy material found inside some bones (bone marrow) produces too many white blood cells called lymphocytes that aren't fully developed and don't work properly. Over time this can cause a range of problems, such as an increased risk of picking up infections, persistent tiredness, swollen glands in the neck, armpits or groin, and unusual bleeding or bruising. CLL is different from other types of leukaemia, including chronic myeloid leukaemia, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and acute myeloid leukaemia. This page covers: Symptoms of CLL Treatments for CLL Outlook for CLL Causes of CLL Support groups and charities Symptoms of CLL CLL doesn't usually cause any symptoms early on and may only be picked up during a blood test carried out for another reason. When symptoms develop, they may include: getting infections often anaemia \u2013 persistent tiredness, shortness of breath and pale skin bleeding and bruising more easily than normal a high temperature (fever) night sweats swollen glands in your neck, armpits or groin swelling and discomfort in your tummy unintentional weight loss You should visit your GP if you have any persistent or worrying symptoms. These symptoms can have other causes other than cancer, but it's a good idea to get them checked out. Read more about diagnosing CLL and complications of CLL. Treatments for CLL As CLL progresses slowly and often has no symptoms at first, you may not need to be treated immediately. If it's caught early on, you'll have regular check-ups over the following months or years to see if it's getting any worse. If CLL starts to cause symptoms, or isn't diagnosed until later on, the main treatments are: chemotherapy \u2013 where medication taken as a tablet or given directly into a vein is used to destroy the cancerous cells a stem cell or bone marrow transplant \u2013 where donated cells called stem cells are transplanted into your body so you start to produce healthy white blood cells Treatment can't usually cure CLL completely, but can slow its progression and lead to periods where there are no symptoms. Treatment may be repeated if the condition comes back. Read more about treating CLL. Outlook for CLL The outlook for CLL depends on how advanced it is when it's diagnosed, how old you are when diagnosed, and your general health. Younger, healthier people who are diagnosed when CLL is still in the early stages generally have the best outlook. Although it can't normally be cured, treatment can help control the condition for many years. Overall, around three in every four people with CLL will live at least five years after diagnosis, but this can range from 10 years or more if caught early on, to less than a year if caught at a very advanced stage. Causes of CLL It's not clear what causes CLL. There's no proven link with radiation or chemical exposure, diet or infections. You can't catch it from anyone else or pass it on. However, having certain genes can increase your chances of developing CLL. You may be at a slightly higher risk of it if you have a close family member with it, although this risk is still small. Support groups and charities Living with a serious and long-term condition such as CLL can be very difficult. You may find it useful to find out as much as you can about the condition and speak to others affected by it. The following support groups and charities can offer help and advice for people CLL, their families and their carers: Bloodwise Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia Support Association (CLLSA) Leukaemia CARE Lymphoma Association The Macmillan Cancer Support and Cancer Research UK websites are also good places for CLL information and support. Page last reviewed: 22\/03\/2016 Next review due: 22\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 124 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bone marrow transplant Chemotherapy Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Macmillan: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia Support Association Bloodwise: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Leukaemia CARE: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Lymphoma Association: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, chronic myeloid","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leukaemia-chronic","content":"Chronic myeloid leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic myeloid leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leukaemia-chronic Clinical trials Leukaemia-chronic Community Chronic myeloid leukaemia Leukaemia-chronic Symptoms Leukaemia-chronic Causes Leukaemia-chronic Diagnosis Leukaemia-chronic Treatment Leukaemia-chronic Complications Introduction  Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. Chronic leukaemia means the condition progresses slowly over many years. Chronic leukaemia is classified according to the type of white blood cells that are affected by cancer. There are two main types: lymphocytes \u2013 mostly used to fight viral infections myeloid cells \u2013 which perform a number of different functions, such as fighting bacterial infections, defending the body against parasites and preventing the spread of tissue damage These pages focus on chronic myeloid leukaemia, which is a cancer of the myeloid cells. The following other types of leukaemia are covered elsewhere: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia acute myeloid leukaemia acute lymphoblastic leukaemia What happens in chronic leukaemia Your bone marrow produces stem cells. These are unique cells because they have the ability to develop into three important types of blood cell: red blood cells \u2013 which carry oxygen around the body white blood cells \u2013 which help fight infection platelets \u2013 which help stop bleeding In leukaemia, a genetic mutation in the the stem cells causes a huge over-production of white blood cells and corresponding drop in red blood cells and platelets. It's this lack of red blood cells which causes symptoms of anaemia, such as tiredness, and the lack of platelets that increases the risk of excessive bleeding. Warning signs of chronic myeloid leukaemia In its early stages, chronic myeloid leukaemia usually causes no noticeable symptoms. As the condition develops, symptoms include: tiredness  weight loss  night sweats a feeling of bloating bruising  bone pain  Read more about the symptoms of chronic myeloid leukaemia.  How common is chronic myeloid leukaemia? Chronic myeloid leukaemia is quite a rare type of cancer. Around 8,600 people are diagnosed with leukaemia every year in the UK. In 2011, around 680 people in the UK were diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukaemia. Chronic myeloid leukaemia can affect people of any age, but it is more common in people aged 40-60. There is no evidence that it runs in families. Outlook The outlook for chronic myeloid leukaemia depends to a large extent on how well a person responds to medication. Most patients (60-65%) do well on imatinib tablets, which are taken every day for life. For those who don't do well on imatinib, more than half respond to one of the alternative drugs. Nilotinib is recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for patients with chronic myeloid leukaemia who are not responding to, or can't tolerate imantinib. Those who fail these drugs or cannot tolerate them may be offered a bone marrow transplant, if this is a suitable treatment. Read more about the treatment of chronic myeloid leukaemia. If the condition is diagnosed early (the chronic phase), the outlook is excellent, with almost 90% of people living at least five years after diagnosis. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 18\/08\/2014 Next review due: 18\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 108 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Acute myeloid leukaemia Stem cell transplant Find cancer support services External links Bloodwise: CML Leukaemia CARE: CML CML Support Macmillan: CML Cancer Research UK: CML My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, hairy cell","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Hairy-cell-leukaemia","content":"Hairy cell leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hairy cell leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Hairy-cell-leukaemia Clinical trials Hairy cell leukaemia Introduction  Hairy cell leukaemia is a rare type of long-term (chronic) leukaemia. The condition gets its name from the fine, hair-like strands that develop around the outside of the cancerous cells and are visible under a microscope. It's not known what causes hairy cell leukaemia. Leukaemia Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. All the body's blood cells, including red and white blood cells and platelets, are produced by bone marrow. Bone marrow is a spongy tissue found inside the bones. It also produces special cells called stem cells. In leukaemia, the cancer begins in the stem cells and causes them to produce more white blood cells than are needed. Over time, the build-up of cancerous white blood cells disrupts the normal balance of cells in the blood. This means your body doesn't have enough red blood cells, which carry oxygen around the body, or platelets, which help stop bleeding. This can lead to the symptoms of anaemia, such as tiredness, shortness of breath and feeling faint, as well as increasing the risk of excessive bleeding. Also, as the white blood cells aren't properly developed, they're less effective at fighting bacteria and viruses, making you more vulnerable to infection. Hairy cell leukaemia The symptoms of hairy cell leukaemia develop slowly and are similar to those of other types of leukaemia. They include: weight loss  pale skin weakness, tiredness and breathlessness (due a lack of red blood cells) frequent infections (due to a lack of infection-fighting white blood cells) bleeding or bruising easily pain or swelling in your abdomen (tummy) (see below) The abnormal white blood cells can accumulate in your spleen, causing it to increase in size. The spleen is an organ in the upper left side of your abdomen, behind your stomach and ribs. If your spleen is enlarged, it's likely you'll have a painful lump on the left side of your abdomen. If this is the case, you should visit your GP so the lump can be examined. An enlarged spleen may remove normal blood cells from your bloodstream. This can lead to a further reduction in the number of normal red and white blood cells and platelets in your blood. Diagnosis If your GP suspects leukaemia, they may refer you to a haematologist (a specialist in blood disorders). The haematologist will carry out blood tests to determine how many different types of blood cells there are in your blood sample. This is known as a full blood count (FBC) and will indicate the number of abnormal white blood cells you have. If you have hairy cell leukaemia, it's likely your red blood cell and platelet counts will be low. A bone marrow sample may also be taken which will give the haematologist more detailed information about your condition. An ultrasound scan or a computerised tomography (CT) scan may be needed to examine your spleen. Treatment As hairy cell leukaemia develops slowly, immediate treatment may not be needed. You'll have regular blood tests to monitor your condition. Treatment may be recommended if the number of abnormal white blood cells increases or if you develop symptoms. A number of different treatments are available for hairy cell leukaemia. Chemotherapy is the main treatment and it's usually effective at destroying the cancerous cells. Other treatments are sometimes used in combination with chemotherapy. Rituximab is a type of medication known as a monoclonal antibody. It seeks out a protein found on leukaemia cells and attaches itself to it. The immune system then targets and kills the cells. Interferon is another medicine that can be used to treat hairy cell leukaemia. It can strengthen your immune system and help fight cancer. This type of treatment, known as immunotherapy, may be recommended if you can't have chemotherapy or rituximab, or they're no longer working. Surgery to remove the spleen is rarely used as a treatment for hairy cell leukaemia. However, removal of your spleen may be recommended if: it's enlarged and is causing pain or discomfort it's destroying large numbers of red blood cells or platelets it hasn't shrunk after chemotherapy The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the types of treatment for hairy cell leukaemia. Outlook As with most types of cancer, the outlook for hairy cell leukaemia will depend on how far the condition has advanced at the time of diagnosis and how well it responds to treatment. As hairy cell leukaemia is a rare type of cancer, it's difficult to accurately predict how it will affect individuals in the long-term.  However, according to Cancer Research UK, at least 96 out of 100 people diagnosed with hairy cell leukaemia (96%) will live at least 10 years after being diagnosed. In hairy cell leukaemia the affected blood cells develop hair-like strands on their suface   How common is hairy cell leukaemia? Hairy cell leukaemia is one of the rarest types of leukaemia. In the UK, around 200 people are diagnosed with hairy cell leukaemia each year. The condition most commonly affects people who are 40-60 years of age. It affects men more than women and is very rare in children and teenagers. Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 13\/10\/2014 Next review due: 13\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 30 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Chemotherapy Chronic lymphoblastic leukaemia Chronic myeloid leukaemia Find cancer support services Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: hairy cell leukaemia Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research: hairy cell leukaemia Leukaemia Care Macmillan: hairy cell leukaemia Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Find out about CLL, a type of cancer affecting the white blood cells that develops slowly over time NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Liver cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-liver","content":"Liver cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Liver cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-liver Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-liver Community Cancer-of-the-liver Liver cancer Cancer-of-the-liver Causes Cancer-of-the-liver Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-liver Treatment Introduction  Primary liver cancer is an uncommon but serious type of cancer that begins in the liver. This is a separate condition from secondary liver cancer, which occurs when cancer that first develops in another part of the body spreads to the liver. The rest of this article refers to primary liver cancer only. The Macmillan Cancer Support website has more information about secondary liver cancer. Signs and symptoms Symptoms of liver cancer are often vague and don't appear until the cancer is at an advanced stage. They can include: unexplained weight loss loss of appetite feeling very full after eating, even if the meal was small feeling sick and vomiting pain or swelling in your abdomen (tummy) jaundice (yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes) itchy skin feeling very tired and weak Visit your GP if you notice any of the symptoms listed above. Although they are more likely to be the result of a more common condition, such as an infection, it's best to have them checked. You should also contact your GP if you have previously been diagnosed with a condition known to affect the liver, such as cirrhosis or a hepatitis C infection, and your health suddenly deteriorates. What causes liver cancer? The exact cause of liver cancer is unknown, but most cases are associated with damage and scarring of the liver known as cirrhosis. Cirrhosis can have a number of different causes, including drinking excessive amounts of alcohol over many years and having a long-term hepatitis B or hepatitis C viral infection. It is also believed obesity and an unhealthy diet can increase the risk of liver cancer because this can lead to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. By avoiding or cutting down on alcohol, eating healthily and exercising regularly, and taking steps to reduce your risk of becoming infected with hepatitis B and C, you may be able to significantly reduce your chances of developing liver cancer. Read more about the causes of liver cancer and preventing liver cancer. Who is affected? Despite being a common type of cancer worldwide, liver cancer is relatively uncommon in the UK, with just over 4,000 new cases diagnosed each year. However, the chances of developing the condition are high for people with risk factors for the condition. The number of people affected by liver cancer rises sharply with age, with around 8 in every 10 cases diagnosed in people aged 60 or older, although it also affects many people younger than this. Around two in every three cases affect men. Over the past few decades, rates of liver cancer in the UK have risen considerably, possibly as a result of increased levels of alcohol intake and obesity.  Diagnosis and screening Liver cancer is usually diagnosed after a consultation with a GP and a referral to a hospital specialist for further tests, such as scans of your liver. However, regular check-ups for liver cancer (known as surveillance) are often recommended for people known to have a high risk of developing the condition, such as those with cirrhosis. Having regular check-ups helps ensure the condition is diagnosed early. The earlier liver cancer is diagnosed, the more effective treatment is likely to be. Read more about diagnosing liver cancer. How liver cancer is treated Treatment for liver cancer depends on the stage the condition is at. If diagnosed early, it may be possible to remove the cancer completely. Treatment options in the early stages of liver cancer include: surgical resection \u2013 surgery to remove a section of liver liver transplant \u2013 where the liver is replaced with a donor liver microwave or radiofrequency ablation \u2013 where microwaves or radio waves are used to destroy the cancerous cells However, only a small proportion of liver cancers are diagnosed at a stage where these treatments are suitable. Most people are diagnosed when the cancer has spread too far to be removed or completely destroyed. In these cases, treatments such as chemotherapy will be used to slow down the spread of the cancer and relieve symptoms such as pain and discomfort. Liver cancer prognosis Because liver cancer is most often detected at an advanced stage, only around one in every five people live for at least a year after being diagnosed, and just 1 in every 20 people live at least a further five years. Read more about treating liver cancer. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 The liver The liver is one of the most complex organs in the human body. It performs hundreds of different functions. Some of the liver's most important functions include: digesting proteins and fats removing toxins (poisons) from the body helping to control blood clotting (thickening) releasing bile, a liquid that breaks down fats and aids digestion Liver cancer can disrupt these functions or cause them to fail completely. Page last reviewed: 29\/09\/2014 Next review due: 29\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 302 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 142  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Cirrhosis End of life issues for carers Find cancer support services Hep C Campaign Living with cancer External links British Liver Trust: liver cancer Cancer Research UK: liver cancer Macmillan: liver cancer My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services 'I got cirrhosis at 34' After years of drinking too much, Andy Ball was diagnosed with the liver disease cirrhosis Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Living with cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Cancer\/Pages\/Cancerhome.aspx","content":"Living with cancer - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Living with cancer Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Cancer, living with Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus One for the Boys: why do men not talk about cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Early cancer diagnosis is key, but that doesn't mean men always get checked out when they should. In this video, actors and sports personalities try to answer the question: Why are men so dumb when it comes to talking about cancer? All NHS Choices videos Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Preparing for your cancer test results If you're waiting for your cancer test results, here's how you can prepare for your consultation. Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a diagnosis and where to find support. Plus watch a video about one man's experience of cancer. Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your priority is medical care. But you can also get help in other areas of life. Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support. Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment. Living with lung cancer Practical advice for living with lung cancer, covering finances, feelings and controlling symptoms. Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions. 'I had breast cancer and then cervical cancer' Juanita explains the impact of cancer on her life, and how charity work helps others and brings her happiness. 'I beat testicular cancer' Former footballer Neil Harris talks about having testicular cancer, including his treatment and telling his family. Cancer: end of life care Information on coping with a terminal cancer diagnosis, including advice on counselling, practical issues and financial help. Talking to your kids about cancer Talking to children about your cancer may be difficult, but these tips can make it easier for you and them. Lung cancer myths and facts We separate the facts from the fiction about lung cancer and its link with smoking and other risk factors. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler talks about her experience of being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. 'I had prostate cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Philip Kissi didn't notice any symptoms. He talks about his diagnosis and treatment. 'My daughter Caron's breast cancer' TV star Caron Keating died from breast cancer in 2004. Her mother, Gloria Hunniford, explains how she coped. Getting started Why a balanced diet is important Keep skin safe in the sun Get help to stop smoking Cut down on your drinking Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Medical Oncology Information and support for mental health Renal units Alcohol addiction Stroke End of life hospice services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Bowel cancer self-assessment Do you have any symptoms? Mole self-assessment Find out if your moles need to be checked Also on NHS Choices Different types of cancer Breast cancer: female Breast cancer: male Bowel cancer Cervical cancer Lung cancer Skin cancer: malignant melanoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Common questions about cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines Breast cancer Information on breast changes to watch out for, plus breast cancer genes, breast reconstruction and mastectomy Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lung cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-lung","content":"Lung cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lung cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-lung Real stories Cancer-of-the-lung Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-lung Community Cancer-of-the-lung Lung cancer Cancer-of-the-lung Symptoms Cancer-of-the-lung Causes Cancer-of-the-lung Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-lung Treatment Cancer-of-the-lung Living with Cancer-of-the-lung Prevention Introduction  Lung cancer is one of the most common and serious types of cancer. Around 44,500 people are diagnosed with the condition every year in the UK. There are usually no signs or symptoms in the early stages of lung cancer, but many people with the condition eventually develop symptoms including: a persistent cough coughing up blood persistent breathlessness unexplained tiredness and weight loss an ache or pain when breathing or coughing You should see your GP if you have these symptoms. Read more about the symptoms of lung cancer. Types of lung cancer Cancer that begins in the lungs is called primary lung cancer. Cancer that spreads from the lungs to another place in the body is known as secondary lung cancer. This page is about primary lung cancer. There are two main types of primary lung cancer. These are classified by the type of cells in which the cancer starts. They are: non-small-cell lung cancer \u2013 the most common type, accounting for more than 80% of cases; can be either squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma or large-cell carcinoma small-cell lung cancer \u2013 a less common type that usually spreads faster than non-small-cell lung cancer The type of lung cancer you have determines which treatments are recommended. Read more about diagnosing lung cancer. Who's affected Lung cancer mainly affects older people. It's rare in people younger than 40, and the rates of lung cancer rise sharply with age. Lung cancer is most commonly diagnosed in people aged 70-74. Although people who have never smoked can develop lung cancer, smoking is the main cause (accounting for over 85% of cases). This is because smoking involves regularly inhaling a number of different toxic substances. Read more about: causes of lung cancer preventing lung cancer Treating lung cancer Treatment depends on the type of cancer, how far it's spread and how good your general health is. If the condition is diagnosed early and the cancerous cells are confined to a small area, surgery to remove the affected area of lung is usually recommended. If surgery is unsuitable due to your general health, radiotherapy to destroy the cancerous cells may be recommended instead. If the cancer has spread too far for surgery or radiotherapy to be effective, chemotherapy is usually used. Read more about treating lung cancer. Outlook Lung cancer doesn't usually cause noticeable symptoms until it's spread through the lungs or into other parts of the body. This means the outlook for the condition isn't as good as many other types of cancer. Overall, about 1 in 3 people with the condition live for at least a year after they're diagnosed and about 1 in 20 people live at least 10 years. However, survival rates can vary widely, depending on how far the cancer has spread at the time of diagnosis. Early diagnosis can make a big difference. Read about living with lung cancer. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS organisations that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for lung cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Page last reviewed: 02\/11\/2015 Next review due: 02\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 603 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 348  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Lung cancer: Peter's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, Peter talks about the symptoms that led to his lung cancer diagnosis, his treatment and the support he received from his cancer nurse specialist. Media last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Call your GP today If you've been coughing for 3 weeks or more, tell your doctor. Call your GP today Useful links NHS Choices links End of life care Lung cancer myths and facts Stop smoking Find lung cancer services External links Lung Cancer Decision Aid NHS Smokefree Cancer Research UK: lung cancer British Lung Foundation: lung cancer Macmillan: lung cancer HealthUnlocked: lung disease The Roy Castle Lung Cancer Foundation My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Community content from HealthUnlocked Asbestos and lung cancer Exposure to asbestos can cause lung cancer. Ian Wright is supporting a campaign to raise awareness among tradesmen Key times to quit smoking Eight key life events that are a great motivation to quit smoking for good Find and choose services for Lung cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Mesothelioma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/mesothelioma","content":"Mesothelioma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Mesothelioma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview mesothelioma Clinical trials mesothelioma Community Mesothelioma Introduction  Mesothelioma is a type of cancer that develops in the lining that covers the outer surface of some of the body's organs. It's usually linked to asbestos exposure. Mesothelioma mainly affects the lining of the lungs (pleural mesothelioma), although it can also affect the lining of the tummy (peritoneal mesothelioma), heart or testicles. More than 2,600 people are diagnosed with the condition each year in the UK. Most cases are diagnosed in people aged 60-80 and men are affected more commonly than women. Unfortunately it's rarely possible to cure mesothelioma, although treatment can help control the symptoms. This page covers: Symptoms of mesothelioma What causes mesothelioma? How mesothelioma is diagnosed Treatments for mesothelioma Outlook for mesothelioma Links to more information Symptoms of mesothelioma The symptoms of mesothelioma tend to develop gradually over time. They typically don't appear until several decades after exposure to asbestos. Symptoms of mesothelioma in the lining of the lungs include: chest pain shortness of breath fatigue (extreme tiredness) a high temperature (fever) and sweating, particularly at night a persistent cough loss of appetite and unexplained weight loss clubbed (swollen) fingertips Symptoms of mesothelioma in the lining of the tummy include: tummy pain or swelling feeling or being sick loss of appetite and unexplained weight loss diarrhoea or constipation See your GP if you have any persistent or worrying symptoms. Tell them about any exposure to asbestos you may have had in the past. What causes mesothelioma? Mesothelioma is almost always caused by exposure to asbestos, a group of minerals made of microscopic fibres that used to be widely used in construction. These tiny fibres can easily get in the lungs, where they get stuck, damaging the lungs over time. It usually takes a while for this to cause any obvious problems, with mesothelioma typically developing more than 20 years after exposure to asbestos. The use of asbestos was completely banned in 1999, so the risk of exposure is much lower nowadays. However, materials containing asbestos are still found in many older buildings. Read more about asbestos and people at risk of exposure and avoiding exposure to asbestos. How mesothelioma is diagnosed If your GP suspects mesothelioma, they will refer you to a hospital specialist for some tests. A number of different tests may need to be carried out, including: an X-ray of your chest or tummy a computerised tomography (CT) scan \u2013 a number of X-ray images are taken to create a detailed image of the inside of the body fluid drainage \u2013 if there's a build-up of fluid around the lungs or in the tummy, a sample may be removed using a needle inserted through the skin so the fluid can be analysed a thoracoscopy or laparoscopy \u2013 the inside of your chest or tummy is examined with a long, thin camera that's inserted through a small cut (incision) under sedation or anaesthetic; a sample of tissue (biopsy) may be removed so it can be analysed These tests can help diagnose mesothelioma and show how far it has spread. Treatments for mesothelioma The best treatment for mesothelioma depends on several factors, including how far the cancer has spread and your general health. As mesothelioma is often diagnosed at an advanced stage, treatment is usually focused on controlling the symptoms and prolonging life for as long as possible. This is known as palliative or supportive care. Possible treatments include: chemotherapy \u2013 this is the main treatment for mesothelioma and involves using medicine to help shrink the cancer radiotherapy \u2013 this involves using high-energy radiation to kill cancer cells and it may be used to slow the cancer down and keep it under control surgery \u2013 an operation to remove the cancerous area can be done if mesothelioma is detected at a very early stage, although it's not clear whether surgery is helpful You'll also probably have treatment for your individual symptoms to help you feel as comfortable as possible. For example, regularly draining fluid from your chest may help your breathing and strong painkillers may help relieve your pain. Sometimes, a procedure is carried out to stop the fluid coming back again by making the outside of the lungs stick to the inside of your chest (pleurodesis), or a tube is put in your chest to drain the fluid regularly at home. Your doctors should discuss these treatments with you. Outlook for mesothelioma Unfortunately the outlook for mesothelioma tends to be poor. This is because it doesn't usually cause any obvious symptoms until late on and it can progress quite quickly once it reaches this stage. Overall: around half (50%) of people with mesothelioma will live at least a year after diagnosis around one in every 10 people (10%) with mesothelioma will live at least five years after diagnosis There are currently around 2,500 deaths from mesothelioma each year in the UK. More information If you'd like to find out more about mesothelioma, the following organisations can provide further information, advice and support: Cancer Research UK  Macmillan Cancer Support British Lung Foundation Mesothelioma UK GOV.UK - mesothelioma payments Page last reviewed: 02\/03\/2016 Next review due: 02\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 62 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Asbestosis Asbestos and lung cancer Find cancer information and support External links Cancer Research UK: mesothelioma Macmillan: mesothelioma British Lung Foundation: mesothelioma Mesothelioma UK Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Asbestosis Asbestosis is a chronic (long-term) lung condition caused by prolonged exposure to asbestos Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Molar pregnancy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Molar-pregnancy","content":"Molar pregnancy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Molar pregnancy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview molar-pregnancy Clinical trials Molar pregnancy Introduction  A molar pregnancy is an unsuccessful pregnancy, where the placenta and foetus do not form properly, and a baby does not develop. What happens In a normal pregnancy, the placenta provides nourishment to the developing baby and removes waste products. The placenta is made up of millions of cells known as trophoblastic cells. In a molar pregnancy, these cells behave abnormally as soon as the egg has been fertilised by the sperm. This results in a mass of abnormal cells that can grow as fluid-filled sacs (cysts) with the appearance of white grapes. These cells grow rapidly within the womb, instead of developing into a baby. The abnormal cells are referred to as a \"mole\", which is from the Latin for mass or lump. Molar pregnancy is also called a hydatidiform mole and is a pre-cancerous form of gestational trophoblastic disease.  Molar pregnancies are caused by an imbalance in genetic material (chromosomes) in the pregnancy. This usually occurs when an egg that contains no genetic information is fertilised by a sperm (a complete molar pregnancy), or when a normal egg is fertilised by two sperm (a partial molar pregnancy). In complete molar pregnancy, the embryo does not develop at all. In a partial molar pregnancy, a foetus can develop but never results in a viable baby, due to the imbalance between the male and female chromosomes. A molar pregnancy is not caused by anything that you or your partner does or does not do. How common is molar pregnancy? Molar pregnancies are rare. About one to three in every 1,000 pregnancies turn out to be molar.  Increased risk Factors that increase the risk of molar pregnancies are thought to include: Age \u2013 complete molar pregnancies are more common in teenage women and women over 45 years old. Age has little or no effect on the risk of partial molar pregnancy.  Previous molar pregnancy \u2013 if you have had one molar pregnancy before, your chance of having another one is around one to two in 100, compared with one in 600 for women who haven't had a molar pregnancy. If you have had two or more molar pregnancies, your risk of having another is around 15-20 in 100.  Ethnicity \u2013 molar pregnancies are most common in Asian countries, such as Taiwan, the Philippines and Japan, and also among Native Americans. However, in recent years, the differences in the incidence of molar pregnancy between these communities and the general population have become less marked.  Types of molar pregnancy There are two main types of molar pregnancy, depending on the balance of chromosomes in the egg. These are: complete moles \u2013 when no normal placental tissue forms and no foetus develops; instead, a mass of abnormal cells grow partial moles \u2013 when some abnormal placental tissue forms along with some abnormal foetus; the foetus cannot develop into a baby In very rare cases, a twin pregnancy can include a normal foetus and a mole. Symptoms and diagnosis There are often no signs that a pregnancy is a molar pregnancy. In most cases, the problem is first spotted during an ultrasound scan, which may be the first pregnancy scan at 10-14 weeks. If there are symptoms, they usually appear between weeks 4 and 12 of pregnancy. The most common symptom is bleeding or losing brown-red fluid from the vagina. Sickness and vomiting may be more severe than in a normal pregnancy. Bleeding usually requires an ultrasound scan. If this scan is abnormal, an evacuation of the uterus is performed. This is when the molar pregnancy is removed, usually with a surgical procedure called suction evacuation. The surgery involves opening your cervix (neck of the womb) with a small tube known as a dilator, and removing any remaining tissue with a suction device. Tissue from the pregnancy is then sent to a laboratory to confirm whether it is a molar pregnancy. If a woman has a miscarriage or a termination for other reasons, tissue may be sent to a laboratory for analysis. This may confirm that the pregnancy was molar, even if a molar pregnancy wasn't suspected. Treatment A molar pregnancy usually needs to be removed surgically. This is done with a suction evacuation, under the care of a gynaecologist. In some cases, molar pregnancy can be treated with the removal of the womb (hysterectomy), but this is usually only if you no longer wish to have children. Almost all cases of molar pregnancy are successfully cured. For further information, go to the Charing Cross Hospital Trophoblast Disease Service or the The Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre websites. After treatment Following the mole's removal, some cells will be left in the womb. These cells usually die off over time in around 90% of women. To check the cells have died, all women who have had a molar pregnancy in the UK undergo monitoring of the hormone hCG (human chorionic gonadotrophin) via the National Trophoblastic Screening Centre's surveillance programme. hCG is the pregnancy test hormone produced by a normal placenta, but also by the mole cells, and is the hormone detected in a pregnancy test. It can also be detected in blood and urine tests. Women on the surveillance programme send in blood or urine samples every two weeks. This is so they can be monitored for signs of persistent trophoblastic disease, which is a risk after all molar pregnancies (see below). Persistent trophoblastic disease needs further treatment with chemotherapy. For further information, go to the Charing Cross Hospital Trophoblast Disease Service or the Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre websites. Hormone monitoring will identify the small number of women who develop a persistent or invasive mole (see below). In these cases, levels of hCG will stay steady or rise, rather than fall. Complications In some cases, the molar disease left after the evacuation of the uterus regrows rather than dies out, and is then known as a persistent disease. This is one of the malignant forms of gestational trophoblastic disease and includes invasive mole and choriocarcinoma. A further suction evacuation may help in a few patients, but chemotherapy is usually necessary to cure the problem. The risk of needing further treatment is: 1 in 10 after a complete molar pregnancy 1 in 100 after a partial molar pregnancy Invasive molar pregnancy is usually treated with chemotherapy in the form of methotrexate and folinic acid. Methotrexate is given as an intramuscular (into the muscle) injection, and folinic acid as a tablet. The injection and tablet are given on alternate days for eight days, followed by a six-day rest period. The eight-day cycle of injections and tablets then begins again. This continues until six weeks after the hCG levels return to normal.  Between one and three in every 100 women may see the condition flare up again, so all women are put into a follow-up programme to monitor their hCG after treatment. Persistent trophoblastic disease is different from normal types of cancer, and the cure rate for women developing it after a molar pregnancy is about 100%. This means that around 100 in 100 women who develop persistent trophoblastic disease after molar pregnancy are cured. There are two treatment centres on in Sheffield and one in London. For further information, go to the Charing Cross Hospital Trophoblast Disease Service or the Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre website. Getting pregnant again It is recommended that you do not get pregnant again until you complete your hCG hormone monitoring, following a molar pregnancy. This normally happens within a few months, but in some cases can take up to a year. Your medical team will discuss this with you. Most women who have chemotherapy treatment for persistent trophoblastic disease will have started their periods again six months after treatment. The Charing Cross Hospital trophoblastic disease treatment team suggest that you do not try to get pregnant again for 12 months after finishing chemotherapy. You can use any method of contraception, including the pill. For an online patient support group with a chat room visit www.mymolarpregnancy.com. Grape-like cysts from a hydatidiform mole  Emotional effects While physical recovery is often relatively quick, it can take longer to recover emotionally from a molar pregnancy. Not only does molar pregnancy involve the loss of a foetus, it also carries the slight risk of a cancerous growth. This can create an enormous emotional strain. Communicating your feelings with your partner, a doctor, a counsellor, or someone else who has gone through a similar experience can be beneficial. There are support groups and forums that can help people handle the stress of a molar pregnancy, such as the Molar Pregnancy Support Group and the Hydatidiform Mole UK Information and Support Service. Read more about dealing with stress, anxiety and depression. Page last reviewed: 09\/10\/2014 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 151 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Stress, anxiety and depression Dilatation and curettage (D&C) External links Molar pregnancy support group Hydatidiform Mole UK Information and Support Service Cancer Research UK: molar pregnancy Coping with bereavement A bereavement counsellor explains what bereavement is, how to cope and where to go for help and support NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Mouth cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-mouth","content":"Mouth cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Mouth cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-mouth Clinical trials Mouth cancer Cancer-of-the-mouth Symptoms Cancer-of-the-mouth Causes Cancer-of-the-mouth Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-mouth Treatment Cancer-of-the-mouth Complications Cancer-of-the-mouth Living with Introduction  Mouth cancer, also known as oral cancer, is where a tumour develops on the surface of the tongue, mouth, lips or gums. Tumours can also occur in the salivary glands, tonsils and the pharynx (the part of the throat from your mouth to your windpipe) but these are less common. Symptoms of mouth cancer include: red or white patches on the lining of your mouth or tongue ulcers a lump See your GP if these symptoms do not heal within three weeks, especially if you're a heavy drinker or smoker. Types of mouth cancer A cancer that develops on the inside or outside layer of the body is called a carcinoma and these types of cancer are categorised by the type of cells the cancer starts in. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common type of mouth cancer, accounting for nine out of 10 cases. Squamous cells are found in many places around the body, including the inside of the mouth and under the skin. Less common types of mouth cancer include: oral malignant melanoma \u2013 where the cancer starts in cells called melanocytes, which help give skin its colour adenocarcinomas \u2013 cancers that develop inside the salivary glands What causes mouth cancer? Mouth cancer occurs when something goes wrong with the normal cell lifecycle, causing them to grow and reproduce uncontrollably. Risk factors for developing mouth cancer include: smoking or using products that contain tobacco drinking alcohol \u2013 smokers who are also heavy drinkers have a much higher risk compared to the population at large infection with the human papilloma virus (HPV), the virus that causes genital warts Read more about the causes of mouth cancer. Who is affected by mouth cancer? Mouth cancer is an uncommon type of cancer, accounting for one in 50 of all cancer cases. In the UK, just over 6,767 new cases of mouth cancer were diagnosed in 2011 (the latest reliable data). Most cases of mouth cancer first develop in older adults who are between 50-74 years of age. Mouth cancer can occur in younger adults, but it's thought that HPV infection may be responsible for the majority of cases that occur in younger people. Mouth cancer is more common in men than in women. This is thought to be due to the fact that, on average, men drink more alcohol than women. Treating mouth cancer There are three main treatment options for mouth cancer. They are: surgery \u2013 where the cancerous cells are surgically removed and, in some cases, some of the surrounding tissue chemotherapy \u2013 where powerful medications are used to kill cancerous cells radiotherapy \u2013 where high energy X-rays are used to kill cancerous cells These treatments are often used in combination. For example, a course of radiotherapy and chemotherapy may be given after surgery to help prevent the cancer returning. Read more about treating mouth cancer. Complications of mouth cancer Both surgery and radiotherapy can make speaking and swallowing difficult (dysphagia). Dysphagia can be a potentially serious problem. If small pieces of food enter your airways and become lodged in your lungs, it could trigger a chest infection, known as aspiration pneumonia. Read more about the complications of mouth cancer. Reducing the risk The three most effective ways to prevent mouth cancer from developing \u2013 or prevent it reocurring after successful treatment \u2013 are: not smoking keeping to the recommended weekly limits for alcohol consumption (21 units for men and 14 units for women (read more about alcohol units) eating a 'Mediterranean-style diet', with plenty of fresh vegetables (particularly tomatoes), citrus fruits, olive oil and fish (read more about healthy eating) It's also important that you have regular dental check-ups because dentists can often spot the early stages of mouth cancer. Outlook If mouth cancer is diagnosed early, a complete cure is often possible using a combination of radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgery. The outlook for mouth cancer can vary depending on which part of the mouth is affected and whether it has spread from the mouth into surrounding tissue. The outlook is much better if the cancer is diagnosed early. Overall, an estimated 40% of people with cancer affecting the mouth and pharyx will live at least five years after their diagnosis and many people live much longer. However, the outlook is better for cancer affecting certain areas of the mouth, such as the lip, tongue or oral cavity. Mouth cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Carrie Newlands, consultant oral and maxillofacial surgeon, talks about the causes and symptoms of mouth cancer. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Head and neck cancers Mouth cancer is a type of cancer that comes under the umbrella term 'cancers of the head and neck'. Other types of head and neck cancers include: cancer of the oesophagus (gullet) cancer of the larynx (voice box) cancer of the nasopharynx (the area where the nose and throat connect) cancer of the thyroid gland (a gland located on either side of the windpipe) Page last reviewed: 05\/06\/2014 Next review due: 05\/06\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 296 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 142  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Drinking and alcohol Find cancer support services Head and neck cancer Living with cancer Radiotherapy Stop smoking External links British Dental Health Foundation: mouth cancer awareness Cancer Research UK: mouth and oropharyngeal cancer Macmillan Cancer Support: head and neck cancers Mouth Cancer Foundation My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Smokefree Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Multiple myeloma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Multiple-myeloma","content":"Multiple myeloma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Multiple myeloma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Multiple-myeloma Clinical trials Multiple myeloma Multiple-myeloma Symptoms Multiple-myeloma Causes Multiple-myeloma Diagnosis Multiple-myeloma Treatment Introduction  Multiple myeloma, also known as myeloma, is a type of bone marrow cancer. Bone marrow is the spongy tissue found at the centre of some bones. It produces the body's blood cells. Multiple myeloma affects the plasma cells (a type of blood cell) inside the bone marrow. Myeloma does not usually take the form of a lump or tumour. Instead, the myeloma cells divide and expand within the bone marrow, damaging the bones and affecting the production of healthy blood cells. Myeloma often affects many places in the body, which is why it is called multiple myeloma. Commonly affected areas include the spine, skull, pelvis and ribs. Signs and symptoms In the early stages, myeloma may not cause any symptoms. It's often only suspected or diagnosed after a routine blood or urine test. However, myeloma will eventually cause a wide range of problems, including: a persistent dull ache or specific areas of tenderness in your bones weak bones that break (fracture) easily tiredness, weakness and shortness of breath (caused by anaemia) repeated infections less commonly, bruising and unusual bleeding \u2013 such as frequent nosebleeds, bleeding gums and heavy periods Read more about the symptoms of multiple myeloma. When to see your GP See your GP if you have any of the above symptoms. While they're unlikely to be caused by cancer, it's best to get a proper diagnosis. Your GP will examine you to check for bone tenderness, bleeding, signs of infection, and any other symptoms that suggest you may have myeloma. They may also arrange blood and urine tests that can detect abnormal proteins produced by myeloma cells. If myeloma is suspected, you will be referred to a consultant haematologist (a specialist in blood conditions) for further tests and treatment. Read more about diagnosing multiple myeloma. Who is affected? Multiple myeloma is an uncommon type of cancer, with around 4,800 new cases diagnosed each year in the UK. It's not known exactly what causes the condition, although it's more common in: people with monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS) \u2013 an excess number of protein molecules called immunoglobulins in your blood men adults over 60 \u2013 most cases are diagnosed at around the age of 70, and cases affecting people under the age of 40 are rare black people \u2013 multiple myeloma is about twice as common in black populations compared with white and Asian populations Read more about the causes of multiple myeloma. How multiple myeloma is treated There is currently no cure for multiple myeloma, but treatment can often help control it for several years. Treatment will often involve: a combination of anti-myeloma medications to destroy the myeloma cells medicines and procedures to prevent and treat problems caused by myeloma, such as bone pain, fractures and anaemia anti-myeloma medicines to control the cancer when it comes back (relapses) As part of your treatment, you may be asked if you want to take part in a clinical trial to help researchers develop better treatments for multiple myeloma. Read more about treating multiple myeloma. Outlook The outlook for multiple myeloma is improving all the time, but the condition still can't be completely cured. Research is ongoing to try to find new and better treatments. As with other types of cancer, the outlook depends on things such as your age and general health. Some people may live less than a year, while others may live 20 years or more. Overall, about 77 in every 100 people will live at least a year, 47 in every 100 will live at least five years, and 33 in every 100 will live at least 10 years. Support groups If you've been diagnosed with multiple myeloma, you may find it useful to contact a local or national support group, such as Myeloma UK. Support groups can offer more information and advice. They can also often put you in touch with other people in a similar situation so you can share advice and talk about your experiences. The Myeloma UK website has more information about how they can help you and finding a local support group. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/02\/2015 Next review due: 16\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 242 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaemia Blood tests Bone marrow transplant Chemotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: myeloma Leukaemia Care: multiple myeloma Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research: myeloma Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation Myeloma UK Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nasopharyngeal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nasopharyngeal-cancer","content":"Nasopharyngeal cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nasopharyngeal cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview nasopharyngeal-cancer Clinical trials nasopharyngeal-cancer Community Nasopharyngeal cancer   Nasopharyngeal cancer is a rare type of cancer that affects the part of the throat connecting the back of the nose to the back of the mouth (the pharynx). In the UK, only about 240 people are diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer each year. Nasopharyngeal cancer shouldn't be confused with other types of cancer that also affect the throat, such as laryngeal cancer and oesophageal cancer. Symptoms of nasopharyngeal cancer It's often difficult to recognise nasopharyngeal cancer because the symptoms are similar to other, less serious conditions. Also, many people with nasopharyngeal cancer don't have any symptoms until the cancer reaches an advanced stage. Symptoms of nasopharyngeal cancer can include: a lump in the neck hearing loss \u2013 usually only in one ear tinnitus \u2013 hearing sounds that come from inside the body rather than from an outside source a blocked or stuffy nose nosebleeds See your GP if you develop any worrying symptoms, particularly if they don't improve after a few weeks. While they're very unlikely to be caused by nasopharyngeal cancer, it's best to get them checked out. What causes nasopharyngeal cancer? The exact cause of nasopharyngeal cancer is unknown, but a number of factors can increase your risk of developing the condition. These include: being of south Chinese or north African descent having a diet very high in salt-cured meats and fish being exposed to the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a common virus that causes glandular fever having a job where you're regularly exposed to hardwood dust having a first-degree relative, such as a parent, who's had the condition Being exposed to the human papilloma virus (HPV) may also increase your risk of developing certain types of nasopharyngeal cancer. About three times as many men as women are affected by nasopharyngeal cancer, and the average age at diagnosis is about 50. Diagnosing nasopharyngeal cancer If you see your GP with symptoms that could indicate nasopharyngeal cancer, they'll usually ask about your symptoms and carry out some examinations. This may involve examining your throat using a small mirror and a light. If your GP thinks further tests are necessary, they'll refer you to hospital. At hospital, a number of different tests may be carried out to check for nasopharyngeal cancer and rule out other conditions. Some of the tests you may have include: a nasendoscopy \u2013 where a thin, flexible telescope (endoscope) is inserted up your nose and passed down your throat to look for any abnormalities; it's carried out while you're awake, but local anaesthetic can be used to numb your nose and throat imaging scans \u2013 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans or computerised tomography (CT) scans can be used to check for tumours and determine whether the cancer has spread a panendoscopy \u2013 a more detailed examination of your nose and throat carried out under general anaesthetic (where you're unconscious) using a series of small, rigid telescopes connected together a biopsy \u2013 where a small tissue sample is removed during a panendoscopy so it can be examined in a laboratory Once these tests are complete, your doctors will be able to confirm whether you have nasopharyngeal cancer. They'll also be able to \"stage\" the cancer, which means giving it a score to describe how large it is and how far it has spread. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the stages of nasopharyngeal cancer. How nasopharyngeal cancer is treated If you're diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer, you'll be cared for by a team of different specialists who work together called a multidisciplinary team (MDT). Members of your MDT will discuss with you what they think the best treatment option is in your case. The two main treatments for nasopharyngeal cancer are: radiotherapy \u2013 where radiation is used to kill cancer cells chemotherapy \u2013 where medication is used to kill cancer cells In most cases, a combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy will be used. Surgery isn't usually used to treat nasopharyngeal cancer as it's difficult for surgeons to access the affected area. Radiotherapy Radiotherapy is the most commonly used treatment for nasopharyngeal cancer. It can be used on its own to treat very early-stage cancers, or in combination with chemotherapy for more advanced cancers. In most cases, external radiotherapy is used. This involves using a machine to focus high-energy radiation beams on to the area that requires treatment. In nasopharyngeal cancer, an advanced form of external radiotherapy called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is used. It involves aiming radiation beams of different strengths at a tumour from several different angles. This helps maximise the dose delivered to the tumour, while minimising the effect on the surrounding healthy tissue. Stereotactic radiotherapy is another way of giving radiotherapy externally and may be used to target a specific area where the cancer has returned. External radiotherapy is often given in short sessions, once a day from Monday to Friday, with a break at weekends. This is usually carried out for up to seven weeks. You won't need to stay in hospital overnight between these appointments. In some cases, internal radiotherapy may be required where nasopharyngeal cancer has returned after initial treatment. A radioactive source is placed into or near the cancerous area and left in place for anywhere from a few minutes to a few days. Depending on the type of treatment you have, you may need to stay in hospital for a short period of time. Radiotherapy itself is painless, but it can have some significant side effects, such as: red and sore skin in the treatment area feeling sick changes to your sense of taste dry mouth  hair loss These side effects are usually temporary, but some can be permanent. Let your care team know if you experience these problems as treatment is often available to help. Read more about how radiotherapy is performed and the side effects of radiotherapy. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy may be used before or alongside radiotherapy for more advanced nasopharyngeal cancers. It's usually given through a drip into a vein (intravenous chemotherapy), with sessions every three to four weeks spread over several months. You won't usually need to stay in hospital overnight during treatment. Like radiotherapy, chemotherapy can cause a number of significant side effects, such as: feeling sick diarrhoea sore mouth tiredness These side effects are usually temporary, but there's also a risk of longer-term problems, such as infertility. You should discuss any concerns you have about the potential side effects of treatment with your care team before treatment begins. Read more about how chemotherapy is performed and the side effects of chemotherapy. Follow-up After your course of treatment ends, you'll need to have regular follow-up appointments and scans to monitor your recovery and check for any signs of the cancer returning. To start with, these appointments will be every few weeks or months, but they'll become gradually less frequent over time. Outlook The outlook for nasopharyngeal cancer depends on your age, general health and how advanced the condition is when you're diagnosed. Radiotherapy alone can cure many very early-stage nasopharyngeal cancers, but many cases are diagnosed at a more advanced stage as the condition doesn't always cause obvious symptoms until later on. More advanced cancers are treated with a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. They're often curable if the cancer hasn't spread beyond the head and neck region. Overall, about 50 out of every 100 people (50%) diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer will live for five years or more after diagnosis. Survival rates are better for younger people, but worse for older people. Around 70 out of 100 (70%) people under 45 years of age, and 35 out of 100 (35%) people aged 65 to 74, will live for five years or more after being diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer. You can read more about the statistics and outlook for nasopharyngeal cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. Further reading You can read more about nasopharyngeal cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. Macmillan is another good source of information and advice about nasopharyngeal cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/10\/2015 Next review due: 12\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 31 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cancer treatment: what happens during radiotherapy? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. See what happens during radiotherapy treatment. An expert describes what happens and advises what questions to ask if you're referred for radiotherapy. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Find cancer support services Head and neck cancer Laryngeal cancer Nasal and sinus cancer External links Cancer Research UK: nasopharyngeal cancer Macmillan: nasopharyngeal cancer Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions, and where to go for further help and support NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neuroendocrine tumours","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neuroendocrine-tumours","content":"Neuroendocrine tumours - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neuroendocrine tumours  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neuroendocrine-tumours Reuters news Neuroendocrine-tumours Clinical trials Neuroendocrine tumours Introduction  Neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) are rare tumours that can occur in the cells of the neuroendocrine system. The neuroendocrine system consists of nerve and gland cells. It produces hormones and releases them into the bloodstream. NETs are tumours (abnormal growths) that develop in the cells of the neuroendocrine system. NETs can be malignant (cancerous) or benign (non-cancerous) and often \u2013 but not always \u2013 grow slowly. There are a number of different types of NET, depending on the specific cells affected. Types of neuroendocrine tumours Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (GEP NETs) are tumours that develop in the gut or pancreas. Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumours (GI NETs) develop in the digestive system, which includes the bowel, stomach or oesophagus. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (pNETs) develop in the pancreas. Pulmonary neuroendocrine tumours develop in the lungs. Rarely, NETs can also develop in other parts of the body, including in the liver, gallbladder, bile ducts, kidneys, ovaries, or testicles. Some NETs, known as functioning tumours, produce hormones that cause specific symptoms. Tumours that don't cause symptoms are known as non-functioning tumours. Symptoms of neuroendocrine tumours The symptoms of a neuroendocrine tumour can vary depending on where it is and what hormones it produces. For example, a tumour in the digestive system may cause diarrhoea, constipation or tummy pains. A tumour in the lung may cause wheezing or a persistent cough. Some tumours (functioning tumours) may cause abnormally large amounts of hormones to be released into the bloodstream. This can cause symptoms such as diarrhoea, flushing, cramps, wheezing, low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia), changes in blood pressure and heart problems. What causes neuroendocrine tumours? What causes neuroendocrine tumours isn't fully understood. However, your chance of developing an NET is increased if you have one of the following rare conditions or syndromes: multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) \u2013 a rare inherited condition where tumours in the endocrine system develop, most commonly in the parathyroid glands, pituitary gland and the pancreas neurofibrmatosis type 1 \u2013 a group of genetic conditions that cause tumours to grow along your nerves Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) \u2013 an inherited condition that causes blood vessels to grow abnormally Research has also shown that your risk of developing an NET is slightly increased if one of your parents has had one in the past. Diagnosing neuroendocrine tumours There are many tests that can be used to diagnose NETs, including blood tests, urine tests, scans, and a biopsy (where a small tissue sample is taken for closer examination). Different types of scans may also be used to identify or examine tumours. These include: ultrasound scans \u2013 including echocardiograms and endoscopic ultrasound scans computerised tomography (CT) scans magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans positron emission tomography (PET) scans octreotide scans \u2013 where mild radioactive liquid is injected into your veins and a special camera is used to highlight any cancerous cells The Cancer Research UK website has more information about tests for rare cancers.  Treating neuroendocrine tumours How a neuroendocrine tumour is treated will depend on your individual circumstances. For example, your treatment will depend on: where the tumour is how advanced your condition is your overall health   Unfortunately, many people are only diagnosed after other parts of their body are affected. However, it may still be possible to surgically remove the tumour, even if it has spread to other parts of your body. If surgery can't be used to completely cure your condition, it may be used to help manage and reduce any symptoms that you have. It may also be possible to shrink the tumour or stop further growth using treatments that block the blood supply to the tumour (embolisation), or chemotherapy, radiotherapy or radiofrequency ablation (where heat is used to destroy the cells). The Cancer Research UK website has more information about neuroendocrine tumours (NETs). Information about you If you have neuroendocrine tumours, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 04\/11\/2014 Next review due: 04\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 58 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Find cancer support services Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) Macmillan: neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) NET Patient Foundation: information and support Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nose and sinus cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-nose-and-sinus","content":"Nasal and sinus cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nasal and sinus cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cancer-of-the-nose-and-sinus Clinical trials Nasal and sinus cancer   Nasal and sinus cancer affects the nasal cavity (the space behind your nose) and the sinuses (small, air-filled cavities inside your nose, cheekbones and forehead). It's a rare type of cancer that most often affects men aged 50-60. Nasal and sinus cancer is different to cancer in the area where the nose and throat connect. This is called nasopharyngeal cancer. This page covers: Symptoms When to see your GP Who's at risk Treatments Outlook Symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer The most common symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer are: a persistent blocked nose, which usually only affects one side nosebleeds mucus draining from the nose, which may be blood-stained a decreased sense of smell These symptoms can be similar to more common and less serious conditions, such as a cold or sinusitis. At a later stage, symptoms can include: pain or numbness in the face swollen glands in the neck partial loss of vision or double vision a bulging or persistently watering eye a lump or growth on your face, nose or roof of your mouth When to see your GP See your GP if you notice any unusual or persistent symptoms. They're very unlikely to be caused by nasal or sinus cancer, but are worth getting checked out. If your GP thinks you might need some tests to determine what's causing your symptoms, you'll usually be referred to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) consultant in hospital. Tests you may have include: a nasal endoscopy \u2013 where a long, thin, flexible tube attached to a light source is inserted into your nose to examine the area a computerised tomography (CT) scan and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan a biopsy (where a small sample of tissue is removed and examined) \u2013 this may be done during an endoscopy or using a needle Who's at risk of nasal and sinus cancer Several factors are known to increase the risk of developing nasal and sinus cancer, including: your gender \u2013 men are more likely to develop nasal and sinus cancer than women prolonged exposure to certain substances through your work, including wood dust, leather dust, nickel, chromium and formaldehyde smoking \u2013 the more you smoke, the higher your risk of developing several types of cancer, including nasal and sinus cancer human papilloma virus (HPV) \u2013 a group of viruses that affect the skin and moist membranes, such as the mouth and throat The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) has produced a report on the risk of occupational nasal and sinus cancer in Great Britain (PDF, 2Mb). Treatments for nasal and sinus cancer The best treatment depends on several factors, including how far the cancer has spread and your general health. Treatment may include: surgery to remove a tumour \u2013 which can be performed using surgical incisions (open surgery) or as keyhole surgery through the nose (endoscopic microsurgery) radiotherapy \u2013 where high-energy radiation is used to kill the cancerous cells, shrink a tumour before surgery, or destroy small amounts of a tumour that may be left after surgery chemotherapy \u2013 where medicine is used to help shrink or slow down the growth of a tumour, or to reduce the risk of the cancer returning after surgery Your treatment will be organised by a head and neck cancer multidisciplinary team (MDT), who will discuss the treatment options with you. A combination of treatments will often be recommended. Outlook for nasal and sinus cancer There are many different types of cancer that can affect the nasal cavity and sinuses. The outlook varies, depending on the specific type you have. Overall, around one in every two or three people with nasal and sinus cancer will live for at least five years after diagnosis. However, this can vary, depending on things such as exactly where the cancer is located and how far it has spread before it's diagnosed and treated. Nearly everyone diagnosed at an early stage will live for at least five years. However, if it's not diagnosed until an advanced stage, only around one in every three to five people will live at least five years. Cancer of the nasal cavity generally has a better outlook than cancer of the sinuses. Want to know more? Living with cancer Macmillan: nasal and sinus cancers Cancer Research UK: nasal and paranasal sinus cancer  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 25\/05\/2016 Next review due: 25\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 59 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Nasopharyngeal cancer Head and neck cancer Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links Macmillan: paranasal sinus cancer Cancer Research UK: nasal and paranasal sinus cancer My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Cancer: your test results If you're waiting for your test results, find out how you can prepare for your consultation Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oesophageal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-oesophagus","content":"Oesophageal cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oesophageal cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Real stories Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Community Oesophageal cancer Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Symptoms Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Causes Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Treatment Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Living with   Oesophageal cancer is a type of cancer affecting the oesophagus (gullet) \u2013 the long tube that carries food from the throat to the stomach. It mainly affects people in their 60s and 70s and is more common in men than women. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Causes Treatments Outlook Symptoms of oesophageal cancer Oesophageal cancer doesn't usually cause any symptoms in the early stages when the tumour is small. It's only when it gets bigger that symptoms tend to develop. Symptoms of oesophageal cancer can include: difficulty swallowing persistent indigestion or heartburn bringing up food soon after eating loss of appetite and weight loss pain or discomfort in your upper tummy, chest or back Read more about the symptoms of oesophageal cancer. When to get medical advice See your GP if you experience: swallowing difficulties heartburn on most days for three weeks or more any other unusual or persistent symptoms The symptoms can be caused by several conditions and in many cases won't be caused by cancer \u2013 but it's a good idea to get them checked out. If your GP thinks you need to have some tests, they can refer you to a hospital specialist. Read about how oesophageal cancer is diagnosed. Causes of oesophageal cancer The exact cause of oesophageal cancer is unknown, but the following things can increase your risk: persistent gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) smoking drinking too much alcohol over a long period of time being overweight or obese having an unhealthy diet that's low in fruit and vegetables Stopping smoking, cutting down on alcohol, losing weight and having a healthy diet may help reduce your risk of developing oesophageal cancer. Read more about the causes of oesophageal cancer. Treatments for oesophageal cancer If oesophageal cancer is diagnosed at an early stage, it may be possible to cure it with: surgery to remove the affected section of oesophagus chemotherapy, with or without radiotherapy (chemoradiation), to kill the cancerous cells and shrink the tumour If oesophageal cancer is diagnosed at a later stage, a cure may not be achievable. But in these cases, surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy can be used to help keep the cancer under control and relieve any symptoms you have. Read more about how oesophageal cancer is treated and living with oesophageal cancer. Outlook for oesophageal cancer The outlook for oesophageal cancer varies depending on things such as how far it has spread, your age and your general health. If it's detected while it's still quite small, it may be possible to get rid of it completely. But as oesophageal cancer doesn't usually cause any symptoms until a late stage, it has often spread quite far by the time it's diagnosed. Cancer Research UK has more information about oesophageal cancer survival statistics. Page last reviewed: 04\/07\/2016 Next review due: 04\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 399 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 181  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Swallowing problems Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Care and support guide Find cancer information and support External links Cancer Research UK: oesophageal cancer Macmillan: oesophageal cancer Barrett's Oesophagus Campaign My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ovarian cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-ovary","content":"Ovarian cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ovarian cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-ovary Real stories Cancer-of-the-ovary Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-ovary Community Ovarian cancer Cancer-of-the-ovary Symptoms Cancer-of-the-ovary Causes Cancer-of-the-ovary Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-ovary Treatment Cancer-of-the-ovary Living with Cancer-of-the-ovary Prevention Introduction  In the UK, around 7,100 women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer each year. It's the fifth most common cancer among women after breast cancer, bowel cancer, lung cancer and cancer of the uterus (womb). Ovarian cancer is most common in women who have been through the menopause (usually over the age of 50), although it can affect women of any age. As the symptoms of ovarian cancer can be similar to those of other conditions, it can be difficult to recognise. However, there are early symptoms to look out for, such as persistent bloating, pain in the pelvis and lower stomach, and difficulty eating. It's important to see your GP if you experience these symptoms, particularly over a long period of time. Read more about how ovarian cancer is diagnosed. The ovaries are a pair of small organs in the female reproductive system that contain and release an egg once a month. This is known as ovulation. Different types of ovarian cancer affect different parts of the ovaries. Epithelial ovarian cancer, which affects the surface layers of the ovary, is the most common type. This topic focuses on epithelial ovarian cancer. What causes ovarian cancer? The exact cause of ovarian cancer is unknown, but certain things are thought to increase a woman's risk of developing the condition, such as age, the number of eggs the ovaries release and whether someone in your family has had ovarian or breast cancer in the past. However, only 1 in 10 cases of ovarian cancer has a genetic link. Read more about the causes of ovarian cancer. Treating ovarian cancer  The treatment you receive for ovarian cancer will depend on several things, including the stage of your cancer and your general health. Chemotherapy is the main treatment for ovarian cancer, but your treatment will usually involve a combination of surgery and chemotherapy. Read more about how ovarian cancer is treated. Overall, 72 out of every 100 women (72%) will live for at least one year after being diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Around 46 out of 100 (46%) women will live for at least five years, and about 35 out of 100 (35%) will live for at least 10 years. However, women with advanced ovarian cancer have a poorer survival rate. As with most types of cancer, the outlook for ovarian cancer will depend on the stage it's at when diagnosed \u2013 that is, how far the cancer has advanced. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the outlook for ovarian cancer. Being diagnosed with ovarian cancer can affect daily life in many ways. However, support is available for many aspects of living with ovarian cancer, including emotional, financial and long-term health issues. Ovarian cancer screening There are methods of screening for ovarian cancer but, currently, they haven't been fully tested. Screening is only available for women who are at high risk of developing the condition due to a strong family history or inheritance of a particular faulty gene. Clinical trials in the UK are currently being carried out to assess the effectiveness of screening in high-risk women and in the general population. A cervical screening test, which used to be called a smear test, can't detect ovarian cancer. Read more about preventing ovarian cancer. Page last reviewed: 21\/01\/2015 Next review due: 21\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 189 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support End of life issues Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: ovarian cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Macmillan: ovarian cancer Ovacome (support network) Ovarian Cancer Action Target Ovarian Cancer The Eve Appeal Ovarian Cancer Action tool: does your family history put you at risk of ovarian cancer? Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your first priority is medical care. But there are people who can help with other aspects of your life Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Ovarian cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pancreatic cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-pancreas","content":"Pancreatic cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pancreatic cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-pancreas Real stories Cancer-of-the-pancreas Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-pancreas Community Pancreatic cancer Cancer-of-the-pancreas Treatment   Pancreatic cancer is caused by the abnormal and uncontrolled growth of cells in the pancreas \u2013 a large gland that's part of the digestive system. Around half of all new cases are diagnosed in people aged 75 or over. It's uncommon in people under 40 years of age. This page covers: Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Treatment Recovering from surgery Symptoms of pancreatic cancer In the early stages, a tumour in the pancreas doesn't usually cause any symptoms, which can make it difficult to diagnose. It's important to remember that these symptoms can be caused by many different conditions, and aren't usually the result of cancer. But you should contact your GP if you're concerned, or if these symptoms start suddenly. The first noticeable symptoms of pancreatic cancer are often: pain in the back or stomach area \u2013 which may come and go at first and is often worse when you lie down or after you've eaten unexpected weight loss jaundice \u2013 the most obvious sign is yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes; it also causes your urine to be dark yellow or orange and your stools (faeces) to be pale-coloured Other possible symptoms of pancreatic cancer include: nausea and vomiting bowel changes fever and shivering indigestion blood clots You may also develop symptoms of diabetes if you have pancreatic cancer, because it can produce chemicals that interfere with the normal effect of insulin. Endocrine pancreatic cancer There are also a number of different endocrine tumours that cause different symptoms, depending on the hormone the tumour produces. Cancer Research UK has more information on symptoms of endocrine pancreatic tumours. Causes of pancreatic cancer It's not fully understood what causes pancreatic cancer, but a number of risk factors for developing the condition have been identified. Risk factors for pancreatic cancer include: age \u2013 it mainly affects people who are 50-80 years of age  smoking \u2013 around one in three cases is associated with using cigarettes, cigars or chewing tobacco having a history of certain health conditions \u2013 such as diabetes, chronic pancreatitis (long-term inflammation of the pancreas), stomach ulcer and Helicobacter pylori infection (a stomach infection) In about 1 in 10 cases, pancreatic cancer is inherited from a person's parents. Certain genes also increase your chances of getting pancreatitis, which in turn increases your risk of developing cancer of the pancreas. Cancer Research UK has more information on: genetic risk factors for pancreatic cancer other possible risk factors for pancreatic cancer Diagnosing pancreatic cancer Your GP will first ask about your general health and carry out a physical examination. They may examine your tummy (abdomen) for a lump and to see whether your liver is enlarged. They'll also check your skin and eyes for signs of jaundice and may request a urine sample and blood test. If your GP suspects pancreatic cancer, you'll usually be referred to a specialist at a hospital for further investigation. You may have either: an ultrasound scan a computerised tomography (CT) scan a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan a positron emission tomography (PET) scan \u2013 where you're given an injection of a very small amount of radioactive medication, known as a tracer, which helps to show up cancers in an image Depending on the results of a scan, further tests may include: an endoluminal ultrasonography (EUS) endoscopy \u2013 a type of endoscopy which allows close-up ultrasound pictures to be taken of your pancreas  an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) \u2013 a type of endoscopy which is used to inject a special dye into your bile and pancreatic ducts; the dye will show up on an X-ray and highlight any tumours a laparoscopy \u2013 a surgical procedure that allows the surgeon to see inside your body using a laparoscopy (a thin, flexible microscope) A biopsy, where a small sample is taken from a suspected tumour, may also be carried out during these procedures. NICE guidelines In 2015, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) published guidelines to help GPs recognise the signs and symptoms of pancreatic cancer and refer people for the right tests faster. To find out if you should be referred for further tests for suspected pancreatic cancer, read the NICE 2015 guidelines on Suspected Cancer: Recognition and Referral. Treating pancreatic cancer Cancer of the pancreas is difficult to treat. It rarely causes any symptoms in the early stages, so it's often not detected until the cancer is fairly advanced. If the tumour is large, treating the cancer will be more difficult. If you've been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, your treatment will depend on the type and location of your cancer, and how far it's advanced. Your age, general health and personal preferences will also be taken into consideration. The first aim will be to completely remove the tumour and any other cancerous cells. If this isn't possible, treatment will focus on preventing the tumour growing and causing further harm to your body. The three main treatments for pancreatic cancer are: surgery chemotherapy radiotherapy Some types of pancreatic cancer only require one form of treatment, whereas others may require two types of treatment or a combination of all three. Read more about treating pancreatic cancer. Recovering from surgery Recovering from pancreatic cancer surgery can be a long and difficult process. You'll probably experience some pain after your operation. The staff at your hospital will make sure you have adequate pain relief. After any type of surgery to your digestive system, your bowel will temporarily stop working. This means you won't be able to eat or drink straight away. You'll gradually be able to sip fluids, before eventually being able to drink and eat more regularly. You may be referred to a dietitian, who can advise you about what foods you should eat following your operation. After the tumour has been removed, you'll probably have a six-month course of chemotherapy, which greatly increases your chance of being cured. But because cancer of the pancreas is difficult to diagnose and treat, many people don't recover completely. Treatment can be very effective in helping to ease symptoms and make you as comfortable as possible. Chemotherapy can help shrink your tumour and slow down its growth. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/06\/2016 Next review due: 24\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 300 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 152  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Chemotherapy Chronic pancreatitis Find cancer support services Having an operation Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: pancreatic cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Lab Tests Online UK Macmillan Cancer Support: pancreatic cancer Pancreatic Cancer UK The Royal Marsden Operation Henry Pancreatic Cancer Action Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Reduce your cancer risk Eating a balanced diet, being a healthy weight and drinking less alcohol could reduce your cancer risk Find and choose services for Pancreatic cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Penile cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Penile-cancer","content":"Penile cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Penile cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Penile-cancer Clinical trials Penile cancer Introduction  Penile cancer is a rare type of cancer that occurs on the skin of the penis or within the penis. In the UK, around 550 men are diagnosed with cancer of the penis each year. It most commonly affects men over 60 years of age. Over the last 30 years, the number of penile cancer cases has increased by more than 20%, possibly due to changes in sexual practices. However, improvements in diagnosis, staging and treatment have led to a similar reduction in the number of deaths resulting from the condition. Signs and symptoms You should be aware of any abnormalities or signs of penile cancer, including: a growth or sore on the penis that doesn't heal within four weeks  bleeding from the penis or from under the foreskin a foul smelling discharge thickening of the skin of the penis or foreskin that makes it difficult to draw back the foreskin (phimosis) a change in the colour of the skin of the penis or foreskin a rash on the penis If you experience these symptoms, it's important that they're checked by your GP as soon as possible. It's unlikely they'll be caused by cancer of the penis, but they need to be investigated. Any delay in diagnosing penile cancer could reduce the chances of successful treatment. Types of penile cancer The penis is made up of many different types of tissue. The type of penile cancer you have will depend on the type of cell the cancer developed from. The most common types of penile cancer include: squamous cell penile cancer \u2013 which accounts for more than 90% of cases and starts in the cells that cover the surface of the penis carcinoma in situ (CIS) \u2013 a particular type of squamous cell cancer where only the cells in the skin of the penis are affected and it hasn't spread any deeper adenocarcinoma \u2013 cancer that starts in the glandular cells of the penis that produce sweat melanoma of the penis \u2013 where the cancer develops in the skin cells that give the skin its colour The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the different types of penile cancer. What causes penile cancer? The cause of penile cancer isn't known, but certain risk factors can increase your chances of getting it. Men who carry the human papilloma virus (HPV) have an increased risk of developing penile cancer, which is the virus that causes genital warts. Studies have found that almost 5 out of 10 men (47%) with penile cancer also have an HPV infection. Age is also a risk factor for cancer of the penis. The condition rarely affects men under 40 years of age, and most commonly occurs in men aged over 60. Smoking is the most significant lifestyle factor associated with penile cancer. Chemicals found in cigarettes can damage cells in the penis, which increases your risk of getting the condition.   Conditions that affect the penis, such as phimosis, which makes the foreskin difficult to retract, increase your chances of developing infections such as balanitis. Repeated infections are linked to a higher risk of developing some types of penile cancer, because they can weaken your immune system. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the risks and causes of penile cancer. Diagnosing penile cancer Your GP will ask you about any symptoms you have and when they occur. They'll also examine your penis for signs of penile cancer. In 2015, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) published guidelines to help GPs recognise the signs and symptoms of penile cancer and refer people for the right tests faster. To find out if you should be referred for further tests for suspected penile cancer, read the NICE 2015 guidelines on Suspected Cancer: Recognition and Referral. If your GP suspects penile cancer, they may refer you to a specialist \u2013 usually a urologist (a doctor who specialises in conditions that affect the urinary system and genitals). The specialist will ask about your symptoms and check your medical history. They may also check for any physical signs of penile cancer. A blood test may be carried out to check your general health and the number of blood cells. To confirm a diagnosis of penile cancer, you may need to have a biopsy. A small tissue sample will be removed so it can be examined under a microscope for cancerous cells. Treating penile cancer  Treatment for penile cancer will depend on the size of the affected area and the rate at which the cancer has spread. For example, in most cases of carcinoma in situ (CIS), where only the skin cells of the penis are affected, treatment will usually involve either using a chemotherapy cream or having laser surgery to remove the affected area of skin. You will usually have a skin graft after surgery. The main treatments for penile cancer that isn't at a very early stage are: surgery radiotherapy chemotherapy Surgery will involve removing the cancerous cells and possibly some of the surrounding tissue. In most cases, any physical changes to your penis after an operation can be corrected with reconstructive surgery. Skin and muscle can be taken from elsewhere in the body to recreate a functioning penis. However, with early diagnosis and modern surgical techniques, your surgeon will usually be able to preserve as much penile tissue as possible. As part of most treatments for penile cancer, the lymph glands (small organs that are part of the immune system) in the groin will be assessed to determine if the cancer has spread. The test that's used, known as a sentinel node biopsy, is widely available in the UK. In some cases, the lymph glands may need to be surgically removed. As with most types of cancer, the outlook for individual cases depends largely on how far the cancer has advanced at the time of diagnosis. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about staging penile cancer and the types of treatment for cancer of the penis. You can also read about penile cancer on the male cancer website Orchid. They also have a helpline you can call \u2013 0203 465 5766 (Monday to Friday, 9am-5.30pm). Prevention It isn't always possible to prevent penile cancer, but you can reduce your chances of getting it. One of the main ways you can reduce your chances of developing penile cancer is to give up smoking (if you smoke). It's also important to maintain good penis hygiene to prevent the bacterial and viral infections that can increase the risk of penile cancer. This is easier if you were circumcised as a child, but there are steps you can take if you haven't been circumcised. Simple penis hygiene can include: using condoms to help reduce the possibility of catching HPV regularly washing your penis with warm water, including under the foreskin There's little evidence to suggest that being circumcised as an adult will reduce your chances of developing penile cancer. However, if you have sores that don't heal, or if it's becoming increasingly difficult to clean under your foreskin, seek advice from your GP about the possibility of circumcision. Read more about penis health. One for the Boys: an introduction Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. One for the Boys is a male cancer awareness campaign. In this video Samuel L. Jackson, actor and chairman of the campaign, describes why it is important to raise awareness and talk about cancer. One for the Boys arms men with the facts and the tools they need to tackle cancer head on. Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 What is cancer? The body is made up of millions of different types of cells. Cancer occurs when some of the cells grow and multiply in an abnormal way. When cancer affects organs and solid tissues, it causes a growth called a tumour to form. Cancer can occur in any part of the body where the cells multiply abnormally. Community content from HealthUnlocked Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Page last reviewed: 11\/09\/2014 Next review due: 11\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 80 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Balanitis Find cancer support services Living with cancer Penis health Phimosis (tight foreskin) External links Cancer Research UK: penile cancer Macmillan Cancer Support: penile cancer Orchid: fighting male cancer Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Phimosis Find out about phimosis, a condition where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis Stop smoking Help with quitting, including what your GP can do, local services and nicotine replacement therapies NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Predictive genetic test for cancer risk genes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/predictive-genetic-tests-cancer","content":"Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes Introduction  Cancer is not usually inherited, but some types \u2013 mainly breast, ovarian, colorectal and prostate cancer \u2013 can be strongly influenced by genes and can run in families.  We all carry certain genes that are normally protective against cancer \u2013 they correct any DNA damage that naturally occurs when cells divide. Inheriting faulty versions or \"variants\" of these genes significantly raises your risk of developing cancer, because the altered genes cannot repair the damaged cells, which can build up and form a tumour. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are two examples of genes that raise your cancer risk if they become altered. Having a variant BRCA gene greatly increases a woman's chance of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer. This was the reason Angelina Jolie had preventative breast cancer surgery, followed by ovarian cancer surgery. They also increase a man's chance of developing male breast cancer and prostate cancer.  BRCA genes are not the only cancer risk genes. Researchers recently identified more than 100 new gene variants associated with an increased risk of breast, prostate and ovarian cancer. Individually, these new gene variants only slightly increase the risk of cancer, but a combination could mean a high risk overall. If you or your partner have a high-risk cancer gene, such as an altered version of BRCA1, it can be passed on to any children you have.  If you're concerned, read on. This page covers: What to do if you're worried  Pros and cons of having a predictive genetic test  What testing involves  What a positive result means   Managing your risk  Telling close relatives  Planning a family  Paying for private testing What to do if you're worried  Speak to your GP if cancer runs in your family and you're worried you may get it too. They may refer you to a local genetics service for an NHS genetic test, which will tell you if you have inherited one of the cancer risk genes.  This type of testing is known as predictive genetic testing. It's \"predictive\" because a positive result means you have a greatly increased risk of developing cancer. It doesn't mean you have cancer or are definitely going to develop it. You may be eligible for this NHS test if the faulty gene has already been identified in one of your relatives, or if there is a strong family history of cancer in your family. See What testing involves, below. Pros and cons of having a predictive genetic test  Not everyone who is eligible for the NHS test will want to have it. It's a personal decision, and should only be made after you've had genetic counselling sessions and talked through what having the test means, how you may feel and how you will cope. Advantages a positive result means you can take steps to manage your risk of developing cancer \u2013 you can make certain lifestyle changes to lower your risk, have regular screening and have preventative treatment (see Managing your risk, below) knowing the result may reduce any stress and anxiety that comes from not knowing Disadvantages the results of some genetic tests are inconclusive \u2013 doctors may identify a variation in a gene, but not know what effect it may have a positive result may cause permanent anxiety \u2013 some people would rather not know about their risk and only want to be told if they actually develop cancer What testing involves   There are usually two steps to genetic testing: A relative with cancer has a diagnostic blood test to see if they have a cancer risk gene (this normally must happen before any healthy relatives are tested). Their result will be ready four to eight weeks later. If your relative's test is positive, you can have the predictive genetic test to see if you have the same faulty gene. Your GP will refer you to your local genetics service for the blood test (you'll need a copy of your relative's test results). The result will take up to two weeks to come through after a blood sample is taken, but this may not happen at your first appointment. This test is fully predictive as a \"clear\" negative test, which will mean you have not inherited the family high risk of cancer. The charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer explains the importance of these two steps: \"Without looking at the genes of an affected relative first, testing a healthy individual would be like reading through an entire book looking for a spelling mistake without knowing where the mistake is, or if there is a mistake at all.\" When there are no affected relatives available, full testing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 may be possible for those with at least a 10% chance of having a genetic fault. This usually means having a very strong family history of early onset breast and particularly ovarian cancer. It takes four to eight weeks to get the result, but this is not fully predictive as a negative test, so cannot rule out that the problem in relatives is due to a different gene. What a positive result means  If your predictive genetic test result is positive, it means you have a faulty gene that raises your risk of developing cancer. It doesn't mean you are guaranteed to get cancer \u2013 your genes only partly influence your future health risks. Other factors, such as your medical history, lifestyle and your environment, also play a role. If you have one of the faulty BRCA genes, there is a 50% chance you will pass this on to any children you have and a 50% chance that each of your siblings also has it. You may want to discuss your results with other members of your family, who may also be affected. The genetics clinic will discuss with you how a positive or negative result will affect your life and your relationships with your family. You can read more about this in the beginner's guide to BRCA1 and BRCA2 (PDF, 866kb) produced by The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust. Insurance companies cannot ask you to disclose the results of predictive genetic tests for the majority of policies, but this may change in the future. Managing your risk   If your test result is positive, you have a range of options to manage your risk. Risk-reducing surgery is not the only option. Ultimately, there's no right or wrong answer about what you should do \u2013 it's a decision only you can make. Regularly examining your breasts If you have the faulty BRCA1\/2 gene, it's a good idea to be aware of changes in your breasts. Read more about being breast cancer aware. This advice applies to men with a faulty BRCA2 gene too, as they are also at increased risk of breast cancer (although to a lesser extent). Screening In the case of breast cancer, annual breast screening in the form of mammograms and MRI scans can also monitor your condition and catch cancer early, if it does develop. Detecting breast cancer at an early stage means it may be easier to treat. The chance of making a full recovery from breast cancer, especially if it is detected early, is relatively high compared with other forms of cancer. Unfortunately, there's currently no reliable screening test for ovarian cancer or prostate cancer. Read more about screening for prostate cancer. However, annual PSA tests for prostate cancer may benefit men who carry the faulty BRCA2 gene. Lifestyle changes Changes in your lifestyle can sometimes reduce your individual cancer risk. These include taking plenty of exercise and eating a healthy diet. If you have a faulty BRCA gene, be aware of other factors that could increase your risk of breast cancer. It's recommended that you avoid: the oral contraceptive pill if you are over 35 combined hormone replacement therapy (HRT) if you\u2019re over 50 drinking more than the maximum recommended daily limits of alcohol being overweight The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) also recommends that women with a family history of breast cancer breastfeed their children, if possible. Read about the things that may help to prevent ovarian cancer. Medication (chemoprevention) NICE has recommended treatment with tamoxifen or raloxifene for a specific group of women who have a high risk of developing breast cancer. These medicines can reduce the risk of breast cancer for up to 20 years from five years of taking them. For more information, read the article: Drugs to be offered to women at high risk of breast cancer, which also explains the side effects these medicines can cause. Read the full NICE 2013 guidelines on familial breast cancer.   Risk-reducing surgery Risk-reducing surgery means removing all the tissue (such as the breasts or ovaries) that could become cancerous. Carriers of a faulty BRCA gene may wish to consider a preventative mastectomy.   Women who have risk-reducing mastectomies reduce their risk of developing breast cancer by around 90%. However, a mastectomy is a major operation and recovering from it can be physically and emotionally difficult. Surgery can also be used to reduce ovarian cancer risk. Women who have their ovaries removed before the menopause not only dramatically reduce their risk of developing ovarian cancer, but also reduce their risk of developing breast cancer by up to 50%. However, this will trigger an early menopause and mean you're not able to have your own children (unless you store eggs or embryos). Read more about surgery to remove the ovaries, including the risks and after-effects. The risk of ovarian cancer in women who carry a BRCA gene fault does not begin to rise significantly until about the age of 40. Therefore, carriers of the faulty gene who are younger than 40 usually wait to have this operation. Telling close relatives   Your genetics unit will not approach your relatives about your result \u2013 it will usually be up to you to tell your family. You may be given a standard letter to share with relatives, which explains your test result and contains all the information they need to be referred for the test themselves. However, not everyone will want to have the genetic test. Women who are closely related to you (such as your sister or daughter) can have cancer screening without having genetic testing. Planning a family  Cancer risk genes can be passed on to any children you have. If your predictive genetic test is positive and you want to start a family, you have several options. You can: Have your children without any intervention, and risk your child inheriting the faulty gene. Adopt a baby. Use donor eggs or donor sperm (depending on who carries the faulty gene) to avoid passing on the faulty gene. Have prenatal testing, which is a test done in pregnancy that reveals whether your baby has the faulty gene. You can then plan to continue or terminate the pregnancy, depending on the test result. Have pre-implantation genetic diagnosis \u2013 a technique used to select embryos that have not inherited the faulty gene. However, there is no guarantee this technique will result in a successful pregnancy, and funding for it on the NHS may not be available to all patients. Paying for private testing If there isn't a strong family history of cancer in your family and the faulty gene hasn't otherwise been identified in any of your relatives, you won't be eligible for the NHS genetic test. You'll have to pay for it privately if you still wish to have the test. Consider this carefully, because: if you don't have any family history of cancer, it's unlikely you have one of the faulty genes the tests can be expensive, potentially costing up to £500-2,000 or more there's no guarantee they will predict whether you'll develop cancer you may not be offered genetic counselling to help you make a decision and support you once you get your results About BRCA1 and BRCA2 If you have a fault (mutation) in one of the BRCA genes, your risk of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer is greatly increased.   Women with the faulty BRCA1 gene, for example, have a 60-90% lifetime risk of breast cancer and a 40-60% risk of ovarian cancer. In other words, out of every 100 women with the faulty BRCA1 gene, between 60 and 90 will develop breast cancer in their lifetime and between 40 and 60 will develop ovarian cancer. The faulty BRCA genes affect around 1 in every 400 people, but people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent are at a much higher risk (as many as 1 in 40 may carry the faulty gene). For more information, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust has produced a beginner's guide to BRCA1 and BRCA2 (PDF, 867kb). Page last reviewed: 05\/05\/2015 Next review due: 05\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 83 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breast cancer Mastectomy Ovarian cancer Prostate cancer External links Cancer Research UK: genes and cancer Macmillan: genetic testing News analysis: Angelina Jolie's breast cancer surgery Actress Angelina Jolie has had a double mastectomy to reduce her high genetic risk of breast cancer. We explain the science behind the headlines Faulty genes and breast cancer The genes associated with breast cancer, what it means to have a faulty gene, and who gets tested NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prostate cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-prostate","content":"Prostate cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Prostate cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-prostate Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-prostate Community Prostate cancer Cancer-of-the-prostate Symptoms Cancer-of-the-prostate Causes Cancer-of-the-prostate Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-prostate PSA testing Cancer-of-the-prostate Treatment Cancer-of-the-prostate Living with Introduction  Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the UK, with over 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. Prostate cancer usually develops slowly, so there may be no signs you have it for many years. Symptoms often only become apparent when your prostate is large enough to affect the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the penis). When this happens, you may notice things like an increased need to urinate, straining while urinating and a feeling that your bladder has not fully emptied. These symptoms shouldn\u2019t be ignored, but they do not mean you definitely have prostate cancer. It is more likely that they are caused by something else, such as benign prostatic hyperplasia (also known as BPH or prostate enlargement). Read more about the symptoms of prostate cancer. What is the prostate? The prostate is a small gland in the pelvis found only in men. About the size of a satsuma, it's located between the penis and the bladder and surrounds the urethra. The main function of the prostate is to help in the production of semen. It produces a thick white fluid that is mixed with the sperm produced by the testicles, to create semen. Why does prostate cancer happen? The causes of prostate cancer are largely unknown. However, certain things can increase your risk of developing the condition. The chances of developing prostate cancer increase as you get older. Most cases develop in men aged 50 or older. For reasons not yet understood, prostate cancer is more common in men of African-Caribbean or African descent, and less common in men of Asian descent. Men who have first degree male relatives (such as a father or brother) affected by prostate cancer are also at slightly increased risk. Read more about the causes of prostate cancer. Tests for prostate cancer There is no single test for prostate cancer. All the tests used to help diagnose the condition have benefits and risks, which your doctor should discuss with you. The most commonly used tests for prostate cancer are blood tests, a physical examination of your prostate (known as a digital rectal examination or DRE) and a biopsy. The blood test, known as a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test, measures the level of PSA and may help detect early prostate cancer. Men are not routinely offered PSA tests to screen for prostate cancer, as results can be unreliable. This is because the PSA blood test is not specific to prostate cancer. PSA can be raised due to a large non-cancerous growth of the prostate (BPH), a urinary tract infection or inflammation of the prostate, as well as prostate cancer. Raised PSA levels also cannot tell a doctor whether a man has life-threatening prostate cancer or not. This means a raised PSA can lead to unnecessary tests and treatment. However, you can ask to be tested for prostate cancer once the benefits and risks have been explained to you. Read more about diagnosing prostate cancer and PSA screening for prostate cancer. How is prostate cancer treated? For many men with prostate cancer, treatment is not immediately necessary. If the cancer is at an early stage and not causing symptoms, a policy of \"watchful waiting\" or \"active surveillance\" may be adopted. This involves carefully monitoring your condition. Some cases of prostate cancer can be cured if treated in the early stages. Treatments include surgically removing the prostate, radiotherapy and hormone therapy. Some cases are only diagnosed at a later stage when the cancer has spread. If the cancer spreads to other parts of the body, typically the bones, it cannot be cured and treatment is focused on prolonging life and relieving symptoms. All treatment options carry the risk of significant side effects, including erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence. For this reason, many men choose to delay treatment until there is a risk the cancer might spread. Newer treatments, such as high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) or cryotherapy, aim to reduce these side effects. Some hospitals may offer them as an alternative to surgery, radiotherapy or hormone therapy. However, the long-term effectiveness of these treatments are not yet known. Read more about treating prostate cancer. Living with prostate cancer As prostate cancer usually progresses very slowly, you can live for decades without symptoms or needing treatment. Nevertheless, it can have an effect on your life. As well as causing physical problems such as erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence, a diagnosis of prostate cancer can understandably make you feel anxious or depressed. You may find it beneficial to talk about the condition with your family, friends, a family doctor and other men with prostate cancer. Financial support is also available if prostate cancer reduces your ability to work. Read more about living with prostate cancer. Page last reviewed: 03\/01\/2015 Next review due: 03\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 908 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 362  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 288  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer community Care and support End of life issues for carers Prostate enlargement Prostate health Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: prostate cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Lab Tests Online UK: PSA test Localised Prostate Cancer Decision Aid Malecare My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Prostate Risk Management Scheme Prostate Cancer UK Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) Testing Decision Aid Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Prostate cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Radiotherapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Radiotherapy","content":"Radiotherapy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Radiotherapy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Radiotherapy Clinical trials Radiotherapy Radiotherapy How it is performed Radiotherapy Side effects Introduction  Radiotherapy is a treatment involving the use of high-energy radiation. It's commonly used to treat cancer. Almost half of all people with cancer have radiotherapy as part of their treatment plan. Radiotherapy is also sometimes used to treat benign (non-cancerous) tumours and other conditions, such as thyroid disease and some blood disorders. This information focuses mainly on the use of radiotherapy as a treatment for cancer. Why it's used Radiotherapy can be used, alone or in combination with chemotherapy (chemoradiotherapy), to try to cure cancers. For people with incurable cancers, radiotherapy is a very effective way of controlling symptoms. Radiotherapy can also be used before surgery to shrink a tumour so it's easier to remove (known as neoadjuvant treatment), or after surgery to destroy small amounts of tumour that may be left (known as adjuvant treatment). How it's carried out Radiotherapy can be given in two different ways \u2013 from outside the body (external radiotherapy) or inside the body (internal radiotherapy). External radiotherapy usually involves using a machine called a linear accelerator, which focuses high-energy radiation beams onto the area requiring treatment. External beam radiotherapy is completely painless. External beam radiotherapy usually involves a series of daily treatments over a number of days or weeks. Internal radiotherapy can involve placing a small piece of radioactive material temporarily inside the body near the cancerous cells (known as brachytherapy), or the use of a radioactive liquid that's swallowed or injected. The radiation emitted by internal radiotherapy is painless, though the procedure to insert the source can sometimes cause mild discomfort. The type of radiotherapy you have and the length of treatment depends on the size and type of cancer, and where it is in your body. Read more about how radiotherapy is performed. How it works The high-energy radiation used during radiotherapy permanently damages the DNA of cancer cells, causing them to die. Nearby healthy tissues also suffer temporary cell damage from radiation, but these cells are usually able to repair the DNA damage and continue growing normally. Side effects The temporary DNA damage to normal tissues causes side effects, most of which are short-lived. Common side effects include sore skin, tiredness and hair loss. These tend to get better within a few days or weeks of treatment finishing. In rare cases, radiotherapy can cause significant long-term effects. For example, treatment to the genitals or pelvic region can cause permanent infertility. Read more about the side effects of radiotherapy. Results Despite the side effects, radiotherapy can be a highly effective treatment for cancer. 4 out of every 10 cancer cures include radiotherapy as part of the treatment plan. However, radiotherapy doesn't cause cancerous tumours to shrink immediately and it can take some time for the beneficial effects to become apparent. These effects depend on the type of cancer you have, other treatments that may be given alongside it (such as chemotherapy or surgery) and how advanced the tumour is when treatment begins. Does radiotherapy make you radioactive? External radiotherapy doesn't make you radioactive, as the radiation passes through your body. However, the radiation emitted by internal brachytherapy radioactive implants can be dangerous to other people while the implant is in place. You should discuss any safety concerns you have with your care team. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS organisations that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for breast cancer, bowel cancer and lung cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 01\/04\/2015 Next review due: 01\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 778 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 324  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 166  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 204  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cancer treatment: what happens during radiotherapy? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. See what happens during radiotherapy treatment. An expert describes what happens and advises what questions to ask if you're referred for radiotherapy. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Chemotherapy Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: radiotherapy Macmillan: radiotherapy Public Health England: medical radiation Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions, and where to go for further help and support NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Skin cancer (melanoma)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Malignant-melanoma","content":"Skin cancer (melanoma) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Skin cancer (melanoma)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Malignant-melanoma Real stories Malignant-melanoma Clinical trials Malignant-melanoma Community Skin cancer (melanoma) Malignant-melanoma Symptoms Malignant-melanoma Causes Malignant-melanoma Diagnosis Malignant-melanoma Treatment   Melanoma is a type of skin cancer that can spread to other organs in the body. The most common sign of melanoma is the appearance of a new mole or a change in an existing mole. This can happen anywhere on the body, but the back, legs, arms and face are most commonly affected. In most cases, melanomas have an irregular shape and more than one colour. They may also be larger than normal moles and can sometimes be itchy or bleed. An \"ABCDE checklist\" has been developed for people to tell the difference between a normal mole and a melanoma. Watch a visual guide to moles. Read more about the symptoms of melanoma. These pages mainly cover a type of melanoma known as superficial spreading melanoma, which accounts for around 70% of all melanomas in the UK. Other types of melanoma are summarised below. Nodular melanoma Nodular melanoma is a fast-developing type of melanoma, most common in middle-aged people. It may not develop from an existing mole and can appear in areas of skin that aren't regularly exposed to the sun. Lentigo maligna melanoma Lentigo maligna melanoma is most common in elderly people and those who have spent a lot of time outdoors. It is common on the face and tends to grow slowly over a number of years. Acral lentiginous melanoma  Acral lentiginous melanoma is a rare type of melanoma that usually appears on the palms of the hands and the soles or big toenails of the feet. This is the most common type of melanoma in people with dark skin. Cancer Research UK has more information about the different types of melanoma. Why does melanoma happen? Melanoma happens when some cells in the skin begin to develop abnormally. It is thought that exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light from natural or artificial sources may be partly responsible. Certain things can increase your chances of developing melanoma, such as having: lots of moles or freckles pale skin that burns easily red or blonde hair a family member who has had melanoma Read more about the causes of melanoma. Diagnosing melanoma See your GP if you notice any change to your moles. Your GP will refer you to a specialist clinic or hospital if they think you have melanoma. In most cases, a suspicious mole will be surgically removed and studied to see if it is cancerous. This is known as a biopsy. You may also have a test to check if melanoma has spread elsewhere in your body. This is known as a sentinel node biopsy. Read more about diagnosing melanoma. How is melanoma treated? The main treatment for melanoma is surgery, although your treatment will depend on your circumstances. If melanoma is diagnosed and treated at an early stage, surgery is usually successful. If melanoma isn't diagnosed until an advanced stage, treatment is mainly used to slow the spread of the cancer and reduce symptoms. This usually involves medicines, such as chemotherapy. Read more about treating melanoma. Once you have had melanoma, there is a chance it may return. This risk is increased if your cancer was widespread and severe. If your cancer team feels there is a significant risk of your melanoma returning, you will probably need regular check-ups to monitor your health. You will also be taught how to examine your skin and lymph nodes to help detect melanoma if it returns. Who is affected Melanoma is the 5th most common cancer in the UK with around 13,000 new cases of melanoma diagnosed each year. More than a quarter of cases are diagnosed in people under 50, which is unusual compared to most other types of cancer. It's also becoming more common in the UK over time, thought to be caused by increased exposure to UV light from the sun and sunbeds. More than 2,000 people die every year in the UK from melanoma. Can melanoma be prevented? Melanoma is not always preventable, but you can reduce your chances of developing it by limiting your exposure to UV light. You can help protect yourself from sun damage by using sunscreen and dressing sensibly in the sun. Sunbeds and sunlamps should also be avoided. Regularly checking your moles and freckles can help lead to an early diagnosis and increase your chances of successful treatment. Read more about sunscreen and sun safety. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_62\/accessible.html Page last reviewed: 10\/10\/2014 Next review due: 10\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 338 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links End of life issues for carers Living with cancer Moles Find cancer support services Non-melanoma External links BAD: skin cancer Cancer Research UK: melanoma Macmillan: melanoma My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services The Royal Marsden: melanoma Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Video: how to apply sunscreen Find out why it is important to protect your skin from sunburn, how to apply sunscreen correctly and what to look out for when buying sun cream. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Skin cancer (non-melanoma)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-skin","content":"Skin cancer (non-melanoma) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Skin cancer (non-melanoma)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-skin Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-skin Community Skin cancer (non-melanoma) Cancer-of-the-skin Symptoms Cancer-of-the-skin Causes Cancer-of-the-skin Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-skin Treatment Introduction  Skin cancer is one of the most common cancers in the world. Non-melanoma skin cancer refers to a group of cancers that slowly develop in the upper layers of the skin. The term 'non-melanoma' distinguishes these more common kinds of skin cancer from the less common skin cancer known as melanoma, which spreads faster in the body. The first sign of non-melanoma skin cancer is usually the appearance of a lump or patch on the skin that doesn't heal after a few weeks. In most cases, cancerous lumps are red and firm, while cancerous patches are often flat and scaly. See your GP if you have any skin abnormality that hasn't healed after four weeks. Although it is unlikely to be skin cancer, it is best to be sure. Read more about the symptoms of non-melanoma skin cancer. Types of non-melanoma skin cancer Non-melanoma skin cancers usually develop in the outermost layer of skin (epidermis) and are often named after the type of skin cell from which they develop. The two most common types of non-melanoma skin cancer are: basal cell carcinoma \u2013 starts in the cells lining the bottom of the epidermis and accounts for about 75% of skin cancers squamous cell carcinoma \u2013 starts in the cells lining the top of the epidermis and accounts for about 20% of skin cancers Although not classed as non-melanoma skin cancers, actinic keratoses and Bowen's disease may sometimes develop into squamous cell carcinoma if left untreated. Why does it happen? Non-melanoma skin cancer is mainly caused by overexposure to ultraviolet (UV) light. UV light comes from the sun, as well as artificial sunbeds and sunlamps. In addition to UV light overexposure, there are certain things that can increase your chances of developing non-melanoma skin cancer, such as: a family history of the condition pale skin that burns easily a large number of moles or freckles Read more about the causes of non-melanoma skin cancer. Who is affected? Non-melanoma skin cancer is one of the most common types of cancer in the world. There are more than 100,000 new cases of non-melanoma skin cancer every year in the UK. Non-melanoma skin cancer affects slightly more men than women. Diagnosis Your GP can examine your skin for signs of skin cancer. They may refer you to a skin specialist (dermatologist) or a specialist plastic surgeon if they are unsure or suspect skin cancer. Your GP may refer you urgently, within two weeks, for squamous cell skin cancer. Basal cell skin cancers usually don't need an urgent referral but you should still see a specialist within 18 weeks. Read a guide to NHS waiting times. The specialist will examine your skin again and will perform a biopsy to confirm a diagnosis of skin cancer. A biopsy is an operation that removes some affected skin so it can be studied under a microscope. Read more about diagnosing non-melanoma skin cancer. Treating non-melanoma skin cancer Surgery is the main treatment for non-melanoma skin cancer. This involves removing the cancerous tumour and some of the surrounding skin. Other treatments for non-melanoma skin cancer include cryotherapy, creams, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and a treatment known as photodynamic therapy (PDT). Treatment for non-melanoma skin cancer is generally successful as, unlike most other types of cancer, there is a considerably lower risk that the cancer will spread to other parts of the body. It is estimated that basal cell carcinoma will spread to other parts of the body in less than 0.5% of cases. The risk is slightly higher in cases of squamous cell carcinoma, which spreads to other parts of the body in around 2-5% of cases. Treatment for non-melanoma skin cancer is completely successful in approximately 90% of cases. Read more about treating non-melanoma skin cancer. Complications If you have had non-melanoma skin cancer in the past, there is a chance the condition may return. The chance of non-melanoma skin cancer returning is increased if your previous cancer was widespread and severe. If your cancer team feels there is a significant risk of your non-melanoma skin cancer returning, you will probably require regular check-ups to monitor your health. You will also be shown how to examine your skin to check for tumours. Prevention Non-melanoma skin cancer is not always preventable, but you can reduce your chances of developing the condition by avoiding overexposure to UV light. You can help protect yourself from sunburn by using sunscreen, dressing sensibly in the sun and limiting the time you spend in the sun during the hottest part of the day. Sunbeds and sunlamps should also be avoided. Regularly checking your skin for signs of skin cancer can help lead to an early diagnosis and increase your chances of successful treatment. Read more about sunscreen and sun safety. Page last reviewed: 08\/10\/2014 Next review due: 08\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 678 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 308  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 113  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Healthy skin Chemotherapy Melanoma Kaposi's sarcoma Find cancer support services Be sun smart video External links Macmillan Cancer research UK Royal Marsden The British Association of Dermatologists Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Stomach cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-stomach","content":"Stomach cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stomach cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-stomach Real stories Cancer-of-the-stomach Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-stomach Community Cancer-of-the-stomach Stomach cancer Cancer-of-the-stomach Symptoms Cancer-of-the-stomach Causes Cancer-of-the-stomach Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-stomach Treatment Cancer-of-the-stomach Living with Introduction  Stomach cancer, or gastric cancer, is a fairly uncommon type of cancer. Around 7,000 people are diagnosed with it each year in the UK. The initial symptoms of stomach cancer are vague and easy to mistake for other less serious conditions. They include: persistent indigestion and heartburn trapped wind and frequent burping feeling very full or bloated after meals persistent stomach pain Symptoms of advanced stomach cancer can include: blood in your stools, or black stools loss of appetite weight loss As the early symptoms of stomach cancer are similar to those of many other conditions, the cancer is often advanced by the time it's diagnosed. It's therefore important to get any possible symptoms of stomach cancer checked by your GP as soon as possible. Read more about diagnosing stomach cancer. Who's affected The exact cause of stomach cancer is still unclear, although you're more likely to develop it if you: are male are 55 years of age or older smoke have a diet low in fibre and high in processed food or red meat have a diet that contains a lot of salted and pickled foods have a stomach infection caused by Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) bacteria  Read more about the causes of stomach cancer. Types of stomach cancer There are several different types of stomach cancer. More than 95% of stomach cancers develop in the cells of the stomach lining and are known as adenocarcinomas. Less common types of stomach cancer include lymphoma of the stomach, which develops in the lymphatic tissue (tissue that drains away fluid and helps fight infection), and gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs), which develop in the muscle or connective tissue of the stomach wall. How stomach cancer is treated Many cases of stomach cancer can't be completely cured, but it's still possible to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life using chemotherapy and in some cases radiotherapy and surgery. If operable, surgery can cure stomach cancer as long as all of the cancerous tissue can be removed. Surgery to remove some or all of the stomach is known as a gastrectomy. It will still be possible to eat normally after a gastrectomy, but you'll probably have to adjust the size of your portions.  Chemotherapy can also be used before surgery to help shrink the tumour and sometimes after surgery to help prevent the cancer returning. Read more about treating stomach cancer. Living with stomach cancer Living with stomach cancer and the effects of surgery can be tough, but there are a range of services that can provide social, psychological and financial support. Read more about living with stomach cancer. Outlook The outlook for stomach cancer depends on several factors, including your age, your general health, and how far the cancer has spread (the stage of the condition). Unfortunately, as stomach cancer isn't often picked up until the later stages, the outlook isn't as good as for some other cancers. Of all those with stomach cancer, about: 42 out of 100 people (42%) will live for at least one year after diagnosis 19 out of 100 people (19%) will live for at least five years after diagnosis 15 out of every 100 people (15%) will live for at least 10 years after diagnosis In the UK, around 5,000 people die from stomach cancer each year. The stomach The stomach is a hollow sac of muscle that's connected to the oesophagus (gullet) at its top and the first section of the small intestine (duodenum) at its bottom. The stomach's main purpose is to break down solid food into a semi-solid consistency using stomach acid. This makes it easier for the rest of the digestive system to absorb nutrients from the food. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/10\/2015 Next review due: 28\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 369 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 184  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 103  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Gastrectomy Having an operation Living with cancer Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: stomach cancer Macmillan Cancer Support: stomach cancer Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your first priority is medical care. But there are people who can help with other aspects of your life Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Testicular cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-testicle","content":"Testicular cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Testicular cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-testicle Real stories Cancer-of-the-testicle Clinical trials Testicular cancer Cancer-of-the-testicle Symptoms Cancer-of-the-testicle Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-testicle Treatment   Cancer of the testicle is one of the less common cancers and tends to mostly affect men between 15 and 49 years of age. The most common symptom is a painless lump or swelling in one of the testicles. It can be the size of a pea or it may be much larger. Other symptoms can include: a dull ache in the scrotum a feeling of heaviness in the scrotum It's important to be aware of what feels normal for you. Get to know your body and see your GP if you notice any changes. Read more about the look and feel of normal testicles, the symptoms of testicular cancer and diagnosing testicular cancer. The testicles The testicles are the two oval-shaped male sex organs that sit inside the scrotum on either side of the penis. The testicles are an important part of the male reproductive system because they produce sperm and the hormone testosterone, which plays a major role in male sexual development. Types of testicular cancer The different types of testicular cancer are classified by the type of cells the cancer begins in. The most common type of testicular cancer is \"germ cell testicular cancer\", which accounts for around 95% of all cases. Germ cells are a type of cell that the body uses to create sperm. There are two main subtypes of germ cell testicular cancer. They are: seminomas \u2013 which have become more common in the last 20 years and now account for 50-55% of testicular cancers non-seminomas \u2013 which account for most of the rest and include teratomas, embryonal carcinomas, choriocarcinomas and yolk sac tumours Both types tend to respond well to chemotherapy. Less common types of testicular cancer include: Leydig cell tumours \u2013 which account for around 1-3% of cases Sertoli cell tumours \u2013 which account for around 1% of cases lymphoma \u2013 which accounts for around 4% of cases This topic focuses on germ cell testicular cancer. You can contact the cancer support specialists at Macmillan for more information about Leydig cell tumour and Sertoli cell tumours. Their helpline number is 0808 808 00 00 and it's open Monday to Friday, 9am to 8pm. Read more about Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. How common is testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is a relatively rare type of cancer, accounting for just 1% of all cancers that occur in men. Around 2,200 men are diagnosed with testicular cancer each year in the UK. Testicular cancer is unusual compared to other cancers because it tends to affect younger men. Although it's relatively uncommon overall, testicular cancer is the most common type of cancer to affect men between the ages of 15 and 49. For reasons that are unclear, white men have a higher risk of developing testicular cancer compared with men from other ethnic groups. The number of cases of testicular cancer that are diagnosed each year in the UK has roughly doubled since the mid-1970s. Again, the reasons for this are unclear. Causes of testicular cancer The exact cause or causes of testicular cancer are unknown, but a number of factors have been identified that increase a man's risk of developing it. The three main risk factors are described below. Undescended testicles Undescended testicles (cryptorchidism) is the most significant risk factor for testicular cancer. About 3-5% of boys are born with their testicles inside their abdomen. They usually descend into the scrotum during the first year of life, but in some boys the testicles don't descend.  In most cases, testicles that don't descend by the time a boy is one year old descend at a later stage. If the testicles don't descend naturally, an operation known as an orchidopexy can be carried out to move the testicles into the correct position inside the scrotum. It's important that undescended testicles move down into the scrotum during early childhood because boys with undescended testicles have a higher risk of developing testicular cancer than boys whose testicles descend normally. It's also much easier to observe the testicles when they're in the scrotum. Men with undescended testicles are about three times more likely to develop testicular cancer than men whose testicles descend at birth or shortly after. Family history Having a close relative with a history of testicular cancer or an undescended testicle increases your risk of also developing it. For example, if your father had testicular cancer, you're around four times more likely to develop it than someone with no family history of the condition. If your brother had testicular cancer, you're about eight times more likely to develop it. Current research suggests a number of genes may be involved in the development of testicular cancer in families where more than one person has had the condition. This is an ongoing area of research in which patients and their families may be asked to take part. Previous testicular cancer Men who've previously been diagnosed with testicular cancer are between four to 12 times more likely to develop it in the other testicle. For this reason, if you've previously been diagnosed with testicular cancer, it's very important that you keep a close eye on the other testicle. Read: What should my testicles look and feel like? If you've been diagnosed with testicular cancer, you also need to be observed for signs of recurrence for between five and 10 years, so it's very important that you attend your follow-up appointments. Cancer Research UK has more information about testicular cancer risks and causes. Outlook Testicular cancer is one of the most treatable types of cancer, and the outlook is one of the best for cancers. In England and Wales, almost all men (99%) survive for a year or more after being diagnosed with testicular cancer, and 98% survive for five years or more after diagnosis. Cancer Research UK has more information about survival rates for testicular cancer. Almost all men who are treated for testicular germ cell tumours are cured, and it's rare for the condition to return more than five years later. Treatment almost always includes the surgical removal of the affected testicle \u2013 called orchidectomy or orchiectomy \u2013 which doesn't usually affect fertility or the ability to have sex. In some cases, chemotherapy or, less commonly, radiotherapy may be used for seminomas (but not non-seminomas). Read more about treating testicular cancer. Page last reviewed: 30\/06\/2016 Next review due: 30\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 434 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 247  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Find cancer support services Radiotherapy Testicular lumps What should my testicles look and feel like? External links Cancer Research UK: testicular cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Malecare: men, fighting cancer together My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Orchid: fighting male cancer Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Reduce your cancer risk Eating a balanced diet, being a healthy weight and drinking less alcohol could reduce your cancer risk 'I beat testicular cancer' Footballer Neil Harris was diagnosed with testicular cancer in 2001 but was back playing for Millwall FC within months Find and choose services for Testicular cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thyroid cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-thyroid","content":"Thyroid cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thyroid cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-thyroid Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-thyroid Community Thyroid cancer Cancer-of-the-thyroid Symptoms Cancer-of-the-thyroid Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-thyroid Treatment   Thyroid cancer is a rare type of cancer that affects the thyroid gland, a small gland at the base of the neck that produces hormones. It's most common in people in their 30s and those over the age of 60. Women are two to three times more likely to develop it than men. Thyroid cancer is usually treatable and in many cases can be cured completely, although it can sometimes come back after treatment. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Types Causes Treatments Outlook Symptoms of thyroid cancer Symptoms of thyroid cancer can include: a painless lump or swelling in the front of the neck \u2013 although only 1 in 20 neck lumps are cancer swollen glands in the neck unexplained hoarseness that doesn't get better after a few weeks a sore throat that doesn't get better difficulty swallowing Read more about the symptoms of thyroid cancer. When to get medical advice See your GP if you have symptoms of thyroid cancer. The symptoms can be caused by less serious causes, such as an enlarged thyroid (goitre), so it's important to get them checked out. Your GP will examine your neck and can organise a blood test to check how well your thyroid is working. If they think you could have cancer or they're not sure what's causing your symptoms, you'll be referred to a hospital specialist for more tests. Read more about how thyroid cancer is diagnosed. Types of thyroid cancer There are four main types of thyroid cancer: papillary carcinoma \u2013 the most common type, accounting for about 8 in 10 cases; it usually affects people under 40, particularly women follicular carcinoma \u2013 accounts for up to 1 in 10 cases and tends to affect middle-aged adults, particularly women medullary thyroid carcinoma \u2013 accounts for less than 1 in 10 cases; unlike the other types, it can run in families anaplastic thyroid carcinoma \u2013 the rarest and most serious type, accounting for around 1 in 50 cases; it usually affects people over the age of 60 Papillary and follicular carcinomas are sometimes known as differentiated thyroid cancers. They tend to be easier to treat than the other types. Causes of thyroid cancer Thyroid cancer occurs when a change to the DNA in the cells in the thyroid causes them to grow uncontrollably and produce a lump. It's not usually clear what causes this, but there are a number of things that can increase your risk. These include: other thyroid conditions, such as an inflamed thyroid (thyroiditis) or goitre \u2013 but not an overactive thyroid or underactive thyroid a family history of thyroid cancer \u2013 your risk is higher if a close relative has had thyroid cancer radiation exposure in childhood \u2013 such as radiotherapy obesity a bowel condition called familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) acromegaly \u2013 a rare condition where the body produces too much growth hormone Treatments for thyroid cancer Treatment for thyroid cancer depends on the type of thyroid cancer you have and how far it has spread. The main treatments are: surgery \u2013 to remove part or all of the thyroid radioactive iodine treatment \u2013 you swallow a radioactive substance that travels through your blood and kills the cancer cells external radiotherapy \u2013 a machine is used to direct beams of radiation at the cancer cells to kill them chemotherapy and targeted therapies \u2013 medications used to kill cancer cells After treatment, you'll be advised to have regular appointments to check whether the cancer has come back. Read more about how thyroid cancer is treated. Outlook for thyroid cancer Overall, the outlook for thyroid cancer is good. Around 9 in every 10 people are alive five years after diagnosis. Many of these are cured and will have a normal lifespan. But the outlook varies depending on the type of thyroid cancer and how early it was diagnosed. For example: more than 9 in 10 people with papillary carcinoma live at least five years after diagnosis more than 8 in 10 people with follicular carcinoma live at least five years after diagnosis around 6 or 7 in 10 people with medullary thyroid carcinoma live at least five years after diagnosis fewer than 1 in 10 people with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma live at least five years after diagnosis The cancer comes back in another part of the body, such as the lungs or bones, in up to one in four people treated for thyroid cancer. But it can often be treated again if this happens. Page last reviewed: 17\/08\/2016 Next review due: 17\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 203 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links British Thyroid Foundation Butterfly Thyroid Cancer Trust Cancer Research UK: thyroid cancer Macmillan: thyroid cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Thyroid cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vaginal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-vagina","content":"Vaginal cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaginal cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-vagina Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-vagina Community Vaginal cancer Cancer-of-the-vagina Causes Cancer-of-the-vagina Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-vagina Treatment Introduction  Vaginal cancer is a rare type of cancer that begins in the vagina. Around 260 new cases are diagnosed in the UK each year. Cancer that begins in the vagina is called primary vaginal cancer. Cancer that begins in another part of the body \u2013 such as the cervix, womb or ovaries \u2013 and spreads to the vagina is known as secondary vaginal cancer. This topic is about primary vaginal cancer. There are separate topics on cervical cancer, ovarian cancer and womb cancer. Signs and symptoms The most common symptom of vaginal cancer is abnormal vaginal bleeding. This includes: bleeding between your normal periods, or after sex bleeding after the menopause (post-menopausal bleeding) Other symptoms can include: smelly or bloody vaginal discharge pain during sex pain when urinating needing to urinate more frequently than usual blood in your urine pelvic pain an itch or lump in your vagina See your GP if you experience any abnormal vaginal bleeding, changes in your usual pattern of periods (such as irregular periods or heavier periods than usual), or problems urinating. While it's highly unlikely that these symptoms are caused by vaginal cancer, they should still be investigated by your GP. Read more about diagnosing vaginal cancer. What causes vaginal cancer? The exact causes of vaginal cancer are unknown, but things that may increase your risk of developing it include: being infected with a particularly persistent type of the human papilloma virus (HPV), which can be spread during sex your age \u2013 seven out of every 10 cases of vaginal cancer affect women over 60, although some rare types can affect teenage girls and women in their twenties a previous history of vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN) or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) \u2013 abnormal cells in the vagina or cervix that can sometimes become cancerous As there is a possible link with HPV, it may be possible to reduce your risk of vaginal cancer by practising safe sex. Read more advice on preventing sexually transmitted infections (STIs). The HPV vaccination, which is now routinely offered to girls who are 12 to 13 years old, provides protection against two strains of HPV thought to be responsible for most cases of vaginal and cervical cancer. Read more about the causes of vaginal cancer. How vaginal cancer is treated Treatment for vaginal cancer depends on which part of your vagina is affected and how far the cancer has spread (known as the \"stage\"). The main treatments for vaginal cancer are: radiotherapy \u2013 radiation is used to destroy the cancerous cells surgery to remove the cancerous cells chemotherapy \u2013 medication is used to kill the cancerous cells; this is often used in combination with radiotherapy These treatments can cause both short- and long-term side effects that should be discussed with your care team before treatment begins. Read more about treating vaginal cancer. Outlook The chances of vaginal cancer being cured depend on things such as the stage at which it was diagnosed, your age and your general health. Overall, around six in every 10 women with vaginal cancer will live for at least five years after diagnosis. Around 110 women die from vaginal cancer every year in the UK. Want to know more? Cancer Research UK: vaginal cancer Macmillan: vaginal cancer Page last reviewed: 05\/02\/2015 Next review due: 05\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 29 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the vagina problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/vagina_problems_a_visual_guide.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Useful links NHS Choices links Cervical cancer Chemotherapy Hysterectomy Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: vaginal cancer The Eve Appeal: vaginal cancer Macmillan: vaginal cancer Postmenopausal bleeding Vaginal bleeding that occurs at least 12 months after your periods have stopped is not normal and shouldn't be ignored Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vulval cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-vulva","content":"Vulval cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vulval cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-vulva Clinical trials Vulval cancer Cancer-of-the-vulva Causes Cancer-of-the-vulva Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-vulva Treatment Introduction  Cancer of the vulva is a rare type of cancer that affects women. Around 1,200 new cases are diagnosed each year in the UK. The vulva is a woman's external genitals. It includes the lips surrounding the vagina (labia minora and labia majora), the clitoris (sexual organ that helps women reach sexual climax), and the Bartholin's glands (two small glands each side of the vagina). Most of those affected by vulval cancer are older women over the age of 65. The condition is rare in women under 50 who have not yet gone through the menopause. Symptoms of vulval cancer Symptoms of vulval cancer can include: a persistent itch in the vulva pain, soreness or tenderness in the vulva raised and thickened patches of skin that can be red, white or dark a lump or wart-like growth on the vulva bleeding from the vulva or blood-stained vaginal discharge between periods an open sore in the vulva a burning pain when passing urine a mole on the vulva that changes shape or colour See your GP if you notice any changes in the usual appearance of your vulva. While it's highly unlikely to be the result of cancer, these changes should be investigated. Read more about diagnosing vulval cancer. What causes vulval cancer? The exact cause of vulval cancer is unclear, but your risk of developing the condition is increased by the following factors: increasing age vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) \u2013 where the cells in the vulva are abnormal and at risk of turning cancerous persistent infection with certain versions of the human papilloma virus (HPV) skin conditions affecting the vulva, such as lichen sclerosus smoking You may be able to reduce your risk of vulval cancer by stopping smoking and taking steps to reduce the chances of picking up an HPV infection. Read more about the causes of vulval cancer. How vulval cancer is treated The main treatment for vulval cancer is surgery to remove the cancerous tissue from the vulva and any lymph nodes containing cancerous cells. Some people may also have radiotherapy (where radiation is used to destroy cancer cells) or chemotherapy (where medication is used to kill cancer cells), or both. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy may be used without surgery if you're not well enough to have an operation, or if the cancer has spread and it isn't possible to remove it all. Read more about treating vulval cancer. Outlook The outlook for vulval cancer depends on things such as how far the cancer has spread, your age, and your general health. Generally, the earlier the cancer is detected and the younger you are, the better the chances of treatment being successful. Overall, around 6 in every 10 women diagnosed with vulval cancer will survive at least five years. However, even after successful treatment, the cancer comes back in up to one in every three cases. You'll need regular follow-up appointments so your doctor can check if this is happening. Can vulval cancer be prevented? It's not thought to be possible to prevent vulval cancer completely, but you may be able to reduce your risk by: practising safer sex \u2013 using a condom during sex can offer some protection against HPV attending cervical screening appointments \u2013 cervical screening can detect HPV and pre-cancerous conditions such as VIN stopping smoking The HPV vaccination may also reduce your chances of developing vulval cancer. This is now offered to all girls who are 12 to 13 years old as part of their routine childhood immunisation programme. Page last reviewed: 22\/04\/2015 Next review due: 22\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 139 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Find cancer information and support Living with cancer Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: vulval cancer Macmillan: understanding vulval cancer The Eve Appeal: vulval cancer Is my vagina normal? No two vaginas are the same: find out what's normal and healthy when it comes to size, shape and colour Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Womb (uterus) cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-uterus","content":"Womb (uterus) cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Womb (uterus) cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-uterus Community Womb (uterus) cancer Cancer-of-the-uterus Symptoms Cancer-of-the-uterus Causes Cancer-of-the-uterus Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-uterus Treatment Cancer-of-the-uterus Living with Introduction  Cancer of the womb (uterus) is a common cancer that affects the female reproductive system. It's also called uterine cancer and endometrial cancer. Abnormal vaginal bleeding is the most common symptom of womb cancer. If you have been through the menopause, any vaginal bleeding is considered abnormal. If you have not yet been through the menopause, unusual bleeding may include bleeding between your periods. You should see your GP as soon as possible if you experience any unusual vaginal bleeding. While it's unlikely to be caused by womb cancer, it's best to be sure. Your GP will examine you and ask about your symptoms. They will refer you to a specialist for further tests if they suspect you may have a serious problem, or if they are unsure about a diagnosis. Read more about the symptoms of womb cancer and diagnosing womb cancer. Types of womb cancer The vast majority of womb cancers begin in the cells that make up the lining of the womb (called the endometrium), which is why cancer of the womb is often called endometrial cancer. In rare cases, womb cancer can start in the muscles surrounding the womb. This type of cancer is called uterine sarcoma and may be treated in a different way from endometrial cancer. This article uses the term womb cancer, and mostly includes information about endometrial cancer. Read more information about soft tissue sarcomas. Womb cancer is separate from other cancers of the female reproductive system, such as ovarian cancer and cervical cancer. Why does womb cancer happen? It's not clear exactly what causes womb cancer, but certain things can increase your risk of developing the condition. A hormone imbalance is one of the most important risks for womb cancer. Specifically, your risk is increased if you have high levels of a hormone called oestrogen in your body. A number of things can cause this hormone imbalance, including obesity, diabetes, and hormone replacement therapy (HRT). There is also a small increase in the risk of womb cancer with long-term use of the breast cancer drug tamoxifen. It's not always possible to prevent womb cancer, but some things are thought to reduce your risk. This includes maintaining a healthy weight and the long-term use of some types of contraception. Read more about the causes of womb cancer and preventing womb cancer. How is womb cancer treated? The most common treatment for womb cancer is the surgical removal of the womb (hysterectomy). A hysterectomy can cure womb cancer in its early stages, but you will no longer be able to get pregnant. Surgery for womb cancer is also likely to include the removal of the ovaries and fallopian tubes. Radiotherapy or chemotherapy are also sometimes used, often in conjunction with surgery. A type of hormone therapy may be used if you are yet to go through the menopause and would still like to have children. Even if your cancer is advanced and the chances of a cure are small, treatment can still help to relieve symptoms and prolong your life. Read more about treating womb cancer. Living with womb cancer Living with cancer is challenging and womb cancer can affect your life in specific ways. For example, your sex life may be affected if you have a hysterectomy. You may find it physically more difficult to have sex and have a reduced sex drive. You may find it beneficial to talk to other people about your condition, including family members, your partner, or other people with womb cancer. Read more about living with womb cancer. Who is affected? Womb cancer is the most commonly occurring cancer of the female reproductive system. It's the fourth most common cancer diagnosed in women after breast cancer, lung cancer, and cancer of the colon and rectum. In the UK, about 8,475 new cases of womb cancer are diagnosed each year. Womb cancer is more common in women who have been through the menopause, and most cases are diagnosed in women aged 40 to 74. Womb cancer accounts for about 3% of all cancers diagnosed in women. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Page last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 243 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bleeding or spotting after the menopause Cancer support services Care and support Cervical cancer Hysterectomy Ovarian cancer Women's health 40-60 Women's health over-60s External links Cancer Research UK: womb cancer The Eve Appeal: womb cancer Macmillan: cancer of the womb My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Find and choose services for Uterine (uterus) cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Candidiasis (thrush)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thrush","content":"Vaginal thrush - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaginal thrush  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrush Clinical trials Vaginal thrush Thrush Treatment Introduction  Vaginal thrush is a common yeast infection that affects most women at some point. It may be unpleasant and uncomfortable, but can usually be treated with medication available from pharmacies or on prescription from your GP. However, for some women, vaginal thrush can be difficult to treat and keeps coming back. This page covers: Symptoms of vaginal thrush What to do if you have vaginal thrush How to treat vaginal thrush What causes vaginal thrush? Preventing vaginal thrush Symptoms of vaginal thrush Typical symptoms of vaginal thrush include: itching and soreness around the entrance of the vagina (itchy labia) vaginal discharge \u2013 this is usually odourless and may be thick and white or thin and watery pain during sex, which may make you worry about having sex a stinging sensation when peeing Sometimes the skin around the vagina can be red, swollen or cracked. Occasionally there may also be sores on the skin, although this is more often a sign of genital herpes. You can use the vagina problems visual guide to help find out what could be causing your symptoms. What to do if you have vaginal thrush If you've had thrush before and think you have it again, you can normally treat it with medicines bought from a local pharmacy. See How to treat vaginal thrush below for more information. It's a good idea to get medical advice from your GP or a sexual health clinic if: you have thrush for the first time you're under the age of 16 or over 60 you're pregnant or breastfeeding \u2013 read more about thrush in pregnancy you have unusual symptoms, such as coloured or smelly discharge, or sores on the skin around your vagina  you have abnormal vaginal bleeding or pain in your lower tummy you've had two episodes of thrush within the last six months you've reacted badly to antifungal treatment in the past, or it didn't work you or your partner have previously had a sexually transmitted infection (STI) and you think it might have returned your symptoms don't improve after 7-14 days of treatment Thrush isn't usually anything to worry about in these cases, but your doctor may want to take a swab from your vagina to confirm the diagnosis and\/or carry out tests to check for any underlying cause. They can also advise you about the most suitable treatment and give you a prescription, if necessary. How to treat vaginal thrush Mild thrush can usually be treated with a short course of antifungal medication. The symptoms will usually clear up within a week or two. Treatment may need to be continued for longer if you have repeated bouts of thrush. Several thrush medicines can be bought over the counter from pharmacies, while others are only available on prescription from your GP. The main types are: pessaries \u2013 a special pill that you insert into your vagina using a special applicator intravaginal creams \u2013 these are also placed into the vagina using an applicator capsules \u2013 these are swallowed and may be more convenient to use than pessaries or intravaginal cream, but can have more troublesome side effects, such as vomiting or an upset stomach These treatments are all equally effective. You can usually choose the treatment you prefer, although pregnant or breastfeeding women shouldn't take the capsules. You can also get creams to apply to the skin surrounding the entrance of your vagina. These can help relieve itchiness and soreness, although you may find that an ordinary emollient (moisturiser) works just as well. Read more about treating vaginal thrush. What causes vaginal thrush? Vaginal thrush is caused by yeasts from a group of fungi called Candida. Many women have Candida in their vagina without it causing any problems, but thrush can develop if the natural balance of micro-organisms in the vagina is disrupted and Candida multiplies. You're more likely to get thrush if you: are in your twenties and thirties \u2013 thrush is less common in girls who haven't started their periods and women who have been through the menopause are pregnant have sex when you're not fully aroused or you're worried it may hurt \u2013 this can lead to vaginal dryness and tightness during sex, which can trigger thrush take antibiotics have poorly controlled diabetes have a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, because of a condition such as HIV or a treatment such as chemotherapy Vaginal thrush isn't classed as an STI, but it can be triggered by sex \u2013 particularly if you have trouble relaxing and your vagina is dry \u2013 and can occasionally be passed on to sexual partners. Preventing vaginal thrush If you get thrush frequently, you can: use water and an emollient (moisturiser) soap substitute to clean the skin around your vagina, but avoid cleaning this area more than once a day apply a greasier moisturiser to the skin around your vagina several times a day to protect it (but be aware that these moisturisers can weaken condoms) avoid potential irritants in perfumed soaps, shower gels, vaginal deodorants, wipes and douches avoid wearing tight-fitting underwear or tights \u2013 some women find that special silk underwear designed for people with eczema and thrush is helpful ensure your blood sugar level is kept under control, if you have diabetes Some women eat probiotic yoghurt or supplements to prevent vaginal thrush, but there's little evidence to suggest this works. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 04\/03\/2016 Next review due: 04\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 850 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 437  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 203  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 130  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Thrush Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. GP Dr Sarah Jarvis describes the symptoms of thrush, a yeast infection, and discusses who is most at risk and how it is treated. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Sexual health Antifungal medicines Oral thrush Thrush in men External links FPA: thrush Brook: thrush Women\u2019s Health Concern: thrush factsheet Keeping your vagina clean and healthy Find out about keeping your vagina clean and healthy without using a douche, scented wipes or perfume Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Candidiasis, men","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thrush-men","content":"Thrush in men - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thrush in men  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrush-men Clinical trials Thrush in men Thrush-men Symptoms Thrush-men Causes Thrush-men Diagnosis Thrush-men Treatment Thrush-men Complications Introduction  Thrush is a yeast infection caused by a fungus called Candida albicans. Both men and women can get thrush, though it is more often associated with women. The medical term for thrush is candidiasis. What it looks like In men, it usually affects the head of the penis \u2013 causing irritation, discharge and redness.  Read more about the symptoms of thrush. It can also affect the skin, known as candidal skin infection, and the inside of the mouth, known as oral thrush. Should I see a doctor? If you suspect thrush for the first time, it's best to see a doctor for a diagnosis. This is because the symptoms can be similar to those of a sexually transmitted infection (STI). Your GP will be able to tell the difference. If you've had thrush before and you recognise the symptoms, you can treat it yourself with over-the-counter medication. You should also visit your GP if you have a weakened immune system and you have thrush. This is because there is a risk that a thrush infection could progress to a more serious case of invasive candidiasis. Read our page on the complications of thrush for more information about invasive candidiasis. Treating and preventing thrush You can treat thrush without prescription medications. For thrush affecting your penis, ask your chemist for clotrimazole cream or a tablet called fluconazole. For thrush infections in your groin or elsewhere, the chemist can supply a cream. It's possible for thrush to spread during sex, but it's not an STI. However, both sexual partners may need thrush treatment to prevent re-infection. Re-infection from a female partner is common. Seek advice from a pharmacist or your GP. However, not all cases are caused by sex, and many cases develop in men and women who are not sexually active. Read more about treating thrush.  You can help prevent thrush by cleaning your penis regularly and using a condom while having sex with your partner (if they have thrush). Avoid using perfumed soaps or shower gels on your genitals, as they can cause irritation. Make sure you dry your penis properly after washing. Wearing loose-fitting cotton underwear can help prevent moisture building up under your foreskin, which lowers the chances of the candida fungus multiplying.  What causes thrush? The fungus candida albicans occurs naturally in your body, particularly in warm, moist areas, such as inside the mouth and around the genitals. It does not usually cause problems because it is kept under control by your immune system (the body\u2019s natural defence against illness and infection) and other types of bacteria in the body. However, certain conditions can cause the fungus to multiply and lead to infection. You are more likely to be at risk of thrush if: you have a weakened immune system are obese, with large rolls of skin (an environment where fungi can often thrive) have type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes \u2013 as the high levels of glucose associated with diabetes can encourage the fungus to breed; people with diabetes also tend to sweat more, creating a perfect breeding environment for the fungus Read more about what causes thrush in men. Thrush Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. GP Dr Sarah Jarvis describes the symptoms of thrush, a yeast infection, and discusses who is most at risk and how it is treated. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Types of thrush Thrush can also affect the mouth, skin and, in women, the vagina. The pages in this section are all about thrush in men, but we also have information on: Oral thrush (in the mouth) Oral thrush in babies Vaginal thrush Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Page last reviewed: 13\/10\/2014 Next review due: 13\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 469 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 227  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 131  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Balanitis Oral thrush Men 18-39 Sexual health Why is my penis smelly and sore External links Embarrassing Problems Brook: advice for under 25s Men's Health Forum Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Candidiasis, oral (adults)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Oral-thrush---adults","content":"Oral thrush in adults - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oral thrush in adults  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Oral-thrush---adults Clinical trials Oral thrush in adults Introduction  Oral thrush is a fungal infection of the mouth. It is not contagious and is usually successfully treated with antifungal medication. It is also called oral candidosis (or candiasis) because it is caused by a group of yeasts called Candida. Symptoms of oral thrush can include: white patches (plaques) in the mouth that can often be wiped off, leaving behind red areas that may bleed slightly loss of taste or an unpleasant taste in the mouth redness inside the mouth and throat cracks at the corners of the mouth a painful, burning sensation in the mouth In some cases, the symptoms of oral thrush can make eating and drinking difficult. When to seek medical advice Speak to your GP if you develop symptoms of oral thrush. If left untreated, the symptoms will often persist and your mouth will continue to feel uncomfortable. In severe cases that are left untreated, there is also a risk of the infection spreading further into your body, which can be serious. Your GP will usually be able to diagnose oral thrush simply by examining your mouth. Sometimes they may also recommend blood tests to look for certain conditions associated with oral thrush, such as diabetes and nutritional deficiencies. What causes oral thrush? Low numbers of the fungus Candida are naturally found in the mouth and digestive system of most people. They don't usually cause any problems, but can lead to oral thrush if they multiply. There are a number of reasons why this may happen, including: taking a course of antibiotics, particularly over a long period or at a high dose taking inhaled corticosteroid medication for asthma wearing dentures (false teeth), particularly if they don't fit properly having poor oral hygiene having a dry mouth, either because of a medical condition or a medication you are taking smoking having chemotherapy or radiotherapy to treat cancer Babies, young children and elderly people are at a particularly high risk of developing oral thrush, as are people with certain underlying conditions, including diabetes, an iron deficiency or vitamin B12 deficiency, an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) and HIV. As most people already have Candida fungi living in their mouth, oral thrush is not contagious. This means it cannot be passed to others. Treating oral thrush Oral thrush can usually be successfully treated with antifungal medicines. These usually come in the form of gels or liquid that you apply directly inside your mouth (topical medication), although tablets or capsules are sometimes used. Topical medication will usually need to be used several times a day for around 7 to 14 days. Tablet or capsules are usually taken once daily. These medications don't often have side effects, although some can cause nausea (feeling sick), vomiting, bloating, abdominal (tummy) pain and diarrhoea. If antibiotics or corticosteroids are thought to be causing your oral thrush, the medicine \u2013 or the way it is delivered \u2013 may need to be changed or the dosage reduced. Preventing oral thrush There are a number of things you can do to reduce your chances of developing oral thrush, including: rinsing your mouth after meals brushing your teeth twice a day with a toothpaste that contains fluoride and interdental cleaning (flossing) regularly visiting your dentist regularly for check-ups, even if you wear dentures or have no natural teeth removing your dentures every night, cleaning them with paste or soap and water before soaking them in a solution of water and denture-cleaning tablets brushing your gums, tongue and inside your mouth with a soft brush twice a day if you wear dentures or have no or few natural teeth visiting your dentist if your dentures do not fit properly stopping smoking if you smoke rinsing your mouth with water and spitting it out after using a corticosteroid inhaler, and using a spacer (a plastic cylinder that attaches to the inhaler) when you take your medicine ensuring that any underlying condition you have, such as diabetes, is well controlled If you have a condition or are receiving treatment that could put you at a high risk of developing oral thrush, your doctor may recommend taking a course of antifungal medication to prevent this happening. Read more about dental health and looking after dentures. Other types of thrush Thrush can also affect the vagina, skin and the head of the penis (glans). For more information about other types of thrush, see: oral thrush in babies vaginal thrush thrush in men Page last reviewed: 14\/08\/2014 Next review due: 14\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 683 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 282  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 163  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 128  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Explore this topic Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Corticosteroids Dental health Dentures Oral thrush in babies Thrush in men Vaginal thrush External links Dental Health Foundation: thrush Diabetes UK Coated tongue Common causes, and what you can do Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Candidiasis, oral (babies)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Oral-thrush---babies","content":"Oral thrush in babies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oral thrush in babies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Oral-thrush---babies Clinical trials Oral thrush in babies   Oral thrush in babies and young children is a fungal infection in the mouth that's usually harmless and easily treatable. Although babies and young children are particularly at risk, oral thrush can also affect adults. Read about: Oral thrush in adults This topic covers: Signs of oral thrush When to seek medical advice Causes of oral thrush Treating oral thrush Advice for breastfeeding mothers Preventing oral thrush Signs of oral thrush in babies The main sign of oral thrush is a white coating on your baby's tongue, although there may also be white patches elsewhere in the mouth. This coating may look like curd or cottage cheese and usually can't be rubbed off easily. If your baby has a white coating on their tongue that does rub off easily, it's more likely to be milk coating the tongue and not thrush. Babies may not seem bothered by the patches, but they may be reluctant to feed \u2013 or keep detaching from the breast during feeds \u2013 if they're sore. There may also be associated nappy rash caused by the same infection that needs to be treated as well. When to seek medical advice Oral thrush in babies isn't usually serious, but you should visit your GP if you think your child may have the condition. You can also ask your health visitor for advice or call NHS 111. If there's any doubt about the diagnosis, your GP may take a swab from your baby's mouth and send it to a lab to be tested. Causes of oral thrush in babies Oral thrush is caused by a yeast fungus called Candida albicans. Healthy people have this fungus in their mouths and it doesn't normally cause problems. But it can overgrow and infect the membranes in the mouth. Babies are at an increased risk of oral thrush because their immune systems haven't yet fully developed and are less able to resist infection. This is particularly the case with babies born prematurely (before 37 weeks of pregnancy). Oral thrush can also affect babies if they've recently been treated with antibiotics. Antibiotics reduce the levels of healthy bacteria in your baby's mouth, which can allow fungus levels to increase. If you're breastfeeding and have been taking antibiotics for an infection, your own levels of healthy bacteria in your body can be affected. This can also make you prone to a thrush infection that may then be passed to your baby during breastfeeding. Treating oral thrush in babies If your GP or health visitor feels your baby needs treatment, they'll probably prescribe an antifungal medicine. The two main antifungal medicines used to treat oral thrush in babies are: miconazole nystatin These medications usually need to be used up to four times a day and are most effective if used after your baby has had a feed or drink. Continue to use the medicine for two days after the infection has cleared up as this will help prevent the infection coming back. If treatment hasn't fully cleared the thrush after a week of treatment, speak to your GP or health visitor again for advice. Miconazole In most cases, miconazole will be the first treatment recommended by a GP. It's available as a gel that you apply to the affected areas using a clean finger. It's important only to apply a little at a time and to try to avoid the back of your baby's mouth to reduce the risk of choking. A small number of babies are sick after being treated with miconazole, but this side effect usually passes and isn't normally any cause for concern. Nystatin In some cases, your GP or health visitor may recommend an alternative medication called nystatin. This comes as a liquid medicine (suspension) that's applied directly to the affected area using a dropper (oral dispenser) supplied with the medicine. Nystatin doesn't usually cause any side effects and most babies have no trouble taking the medication. Advice for breastfeeding mothers If your baby has oral thrush and you're breastfeeding, it's possible for your baby to pass a thrush infection to you. This can affect your nipples or breasts and cause nipple thrush. Symptoms of nipple thrush can include: pain while you're feeding your baby, which may continue after the feed is finished cracked, flaky or sensitive nipples and areolas (the darker area around your nipple) changes in the colour of your nipples or areolas If you have nipple thrush, or there's a risk of your baby passing thrush on to you, you'll normally be advised to continue breastfeeding while using an antifungal cream such as miconazole to treat the infection. You should apply the cream to your nipples after every feed, and remove any that's left before the next feed. In severe cases of nipple thrush, antifungal tablets may be recommended. Preventing oral thrush in babies It's not clear whether it's possible to prevent oral thrush in babies. Some doctors suggest the following advice may help: sterilise dummies regularly, as well as any toys that your baby puts in their mouth sterilise bottles and other feeding equipment regularly, especially the teats Washing your hands thoroughly after changing your baby's nappy can also be helpful in stopping thrush spreading because the infection can be passed through their digestive system. Page last reviewed: 19\/07\/2016 Next review due: 19\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 224 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breastfeeding and thrush Can my baby's oral thrush affect me if I'm breastfeeding? Oral thrush in adults External links Breastfeeding Network Family Lives Breastfeeding and thrush Breast and nipple pain in breastfeeding women is sometimes caused by a thrush (candida) infection in the breast. Find out how to spot and treat thrush Soothing a crying baby It can be hard to know what a crying baby needs, especially in the early days. Use these tips to help soothe them Medicines for babies and children Not all medicines are suitable for young children. Find out what to use to treat your sick child NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Carbon monoxide poisoning","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Carbon-monoxide-poisoning","content":"Carbon monoxide poisoning - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Carbon monoxide poisoning  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Carbon-monoxide-poisoning Clinical trials Carbon monoxide poisoning   Carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas that has no smell or taste. Breathing it in can make you unwell, and it can kill if you're exposed to high levels. Every year in the UK, more than 200 people go to hospital with suspected carbon monoxide poisoning, which leads to around 50 deaths. After carbon monoxide is breathed in, it enters your bloodstream and mixes with haemoglobin (the part of red blood cells that carry oxygen around your body), to form carboxyhaemoglobin. When this happens, the blood is no longer able to carry oxygen, and this lack of oxygen causes the body\u2019s cells and tissue to fail and die. This topic covers the following areas: Symptoms of CO poisoning What causes CO to leak? Treating CO poisoning Complications of CO poisoning Preventing CO poisoning What to do if you suspect a CO leak Being aware of the signs At-risk groups Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning The symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning aren't always obvious, particularly during low-level exposure. A tension-type headache is the most common symptom of mild carbon monoxide poisoning. Other symptoms include: dizziness nausea (feeling sick) and vomiting tiredness and confusion stomach pain shortness of breath and difficulty breathing The symptoms of exposure to low levels of carbon monoxide can be similar to those of food poisoning and flu. But unlike flu, carbon monoxide poisoning doesn't cause a high temperature (fever). The symptoms can gradually get worse with prolonged exposure to carbon monoxide, leading to a delay in diagnosis. Your symptoms may be less severe when you're away from the source of the carbon monoxide. If this is the case you should investigate the possibility of a carbon monoxide leak, and ask a suitably qualified professional to check any appliances you think may be faulty and leaking gas.  The longer you inhale the gas, the worse your symptoms will be. You may lose balance, vision and memory and, eventually, you may lose consciousness. This can happen within two hours if there's a lot of carbon monoxide in the air. Long-term exposure to low levels of carbon monoxide can also lead to neurological symptoms, such as difficulty thinking or concentrating and frequent emotional changes \u2013 for example, becoming easily irritated, depressed or making impulsive or irrational decisions. Breathing in high levels of carbon monoxide gas can cause more severe symptoms. These may include: impaired mental state and personality changes (intoxication) vertigo \u2013 the feeling that you or the environment around you is spinning ataxia \u2013 loss of physical co-ordination caused by underlying damage to the brain and nervous system breathlessness and tachycardia (a heart rate of more than 100 beats per minute) chest pain caused by angina or a heart attack seizures \u2013 an uncontrollable burst of electrical activity in the brain that causes muscle spasms loss of consciousness \u2013 in cases where there are very high levels of carbon monoxide, death may occur within minutes What causes carbon monoxide to leak? Carbon monoxide is produced when fuels such as gas, oil, coal and wood don't burn fully. Burning charcoal, running cars and the smoke from cigarettes also produce carbon monoxide gas. Gas, oil, coal and wood are sources of fuel used in many household appliances, including: boilers gas fires central heating systems water heaters cookers open fires Incorrectly installed, poorly maintained or poorly ventilated household appliances \u2013 such as cookers, heaters and central heating boilers \u2013 are the most common causes of accidental exposure to carbon monoxide. The risk of exposure to carbon monoxide from portable devices may also be higher in caravans, boats and mobile homes. Other possible causes of carbon monoxide poisoning include: blocked flues and chimneys \u2013 this can stop carbon monoxide escaping, allowing it to reach dangerous levels burning fuel in an enclosed or unventilated space \u2013 for example, running a car engine, petrol-powered generator or barbecue inside a garage, or a faulty boiler in an enclosed kitchen faulty or blocked car exhausts \u2013 a leak or blockage in the exhaust pipe, such as after heavy snowfall, could lead to a build-up of carbon monoxide paint fumes \u2013 some cleaning fluids and paint removers contain methylene chloride (dichloromethane), which can cause carbon monoxide poisoning if breathed in smoking shisha pipes indoors \u2013 shisha pipes burn charcoal and tobacco, which can lead to a build-up of carbon monoxide in enclosed or unventilated rooms Treating carbon monoxide poisoning Seek medical advice from your GP if you think you've been exposed to low levels of carbon monoxide. Go immediately to your local accident and emergency (A&E) department if you think you've been exposed to high levels. Your symptoms will often indicate whether you have carbon monoxide poisoning, but a blood test will confirm the amount of carboxyhaemoglobin in your blood. A level of 30% indicates severe exposure. People who smoke can often have higher than normal levels of carboxyhaemoglobin in their blood, which can sometimes make it difficult to interpret the results. Mild carbon monoxide poisoning doesn't usually need hospital treatment, but it's still important that you seek medical advice. Your house will also need to be checked for safety before anyone returns. Read more about what to do if you suspect a leak. Standard oxygen therapy Standard oxygen therapy in hospital will be needed if you've been exposed to a high level of carbon monoxide, or you have symptoms that suggest exposure. You'll be given 100% oxygen through a tight-fitting mask (normal air contains around 21% oxygen). Breathing in concentrated oxygen enables your body to quickly replace carboxyhaemoglobin. Therapy will continue until your carboxyhaemoglobin levels decrease to less than 10%. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) floods the body with pure oxygen, helping it overcome the oxygen shortage caused by carbon monoxide poisoning. There's currently insufficient evidence regarding the long-term effectiveness of HBOT for treating severe cases of carbon monoxide poisoning. Therefore, standard oxygen therapy is usually the recommended treatment option. HBOT may be recommended in certain situations \u2013 for example, if there's been extensive exposure to carbon monoxide and nerve damage is suspected. The use of HBOT will be decided on a case-by-case basis. Recovery The length of time it takes to recover from carbon monoxide poisoning will depend on how much carbon monoxide you've been exposed to and how long you've been exposed to it. Complications of carbon monoxide poisoning Prolonged significant exposure to carbon monoxide can cause serious complications, including brain damage and heart problems. In very severe cases, it can result in death.  Effects of severe carbon monoxide poisoning include: breathlessness chest pains seizures (fits) loss of consciousness Around 10-15% of people who have severe carbon monoxide poisoning develop long-term complications. Brain damage Prolonged exposure to carbon monoxide can cause memory problems and difficulty concentrating. It can also cause vision loss and hearing loss. In rare cases, severe carbon monoxide poisoning can cause Parkinsonism, which is characterised by tremors, stiffness and slow movement. Parkinsonism isn't the same as Parkinson's disease, which is a degenerative neurological condition linked to ageing. Heart disease Coronary heart disease is another serious condition that can develop as a result of long-term carbon monoxide exposure. Coronary heart disease is where the heart's blood supply is blocked or interrupted by a build-up of fatty substances (atheroma) in the coronary arteries. If the blood supply is restricted, it can cause angina (chest pains). If the coronary arteries become completely blocked, it can cause a heart attack. Harm to unborn babies Long-term exposure to carbon monoxide gas can also damage an unborn baby. Babies exposed to carbon monoxide during pregnancy are at risk of: low birth weight perinatal death (stillbirth and death that occurs within the first four weeks of birth) behavioural problems Preventing carbon monoxide poisoning It's important to be aware of the dangers and identify any appliances in your house that could potentially leak carbon monoxide.  Maintaining and servicing appliances Boilers, cookers, heating systems and appliances should be installed and regularly serviced by a reputable, registered engineer. Don't attempt to install or service appliances yourself. Anyone carrying out work on installations and appliances in your home must be registered with a relevant association, such as the: Gas Safe Register (for gas appliances) Heating Equipment Testing and Approval Scheme (HETAS) (for solid fuel appliances) Oil Firing Technical Association (OFTEC) (for oil appliances) Maintaining chimneys and flues Make sure all chimneys and flues are swept regularly by a qualified sweep who's a member of the:  National Association of Chimney Sweeps (NACS)  Guild of Master Chimney Sweeps  Association of Professional Independent Chimney Sweeps (APICS)  Engine exhaust fumes To protect you from carbon monoxide poisoning caused by exhaust fumes: don't leave petrol-fuelled lawnmowers or cars running in the garage make sure your car's exhaust is checked every year for leaks make sure your exhaust isn't blocked before turning the engine on \u2013 for example, after heavy snowfall Carbon monoxide alarms Install a carbon monoxide alarm in your home to alert you if there's a carbon monoxide leak. However, an alarm isn't a substitute for maintaining and regularly servicing household appliances. You can buy a carbon monoxide alarm from a DIY or hardware store. Make sure it's approved to the latest British or European Standard (BS Kitemark or EN50291). Other safety tips at home and in the workplace Follow the safety tips below to help protect yourself at home and in the workplace:  Never use ovens or gas ranges to heat your home. Never use oversized pots on your gas stove, or place foil around the burners. Make sure rooms are well-ventilated and don't block air vents. If your home is double-glazed or draught-proofed, make sure there's still enough air circulating for any heaters that are in the room. Don't use gas-powered equipment and tools inside your home if you can avoid it. Only use them in a well-ventilated area, and put the engine unit and exhaust outside. Always wear a safety mask when using chemicals that contain methylene chloride. Don't burn charcoal in an enclosed space, such as on an indoor barbecue. Don't sleep in a room that has an unflued gas fire or paraffin heater. Fit an extractor fan in your kitchen (if it doesn't already have one). What to do if you suspect a carbon monoxide leak If your carbon monoxide alarm sounds or you suspect a leak: stop using all appliances, switch them off, and open doors and windows to ventilate the property evacuate the property immediately \u2013 stay calm and avoid raising your heart rate   call the gas emergency number on 0800 111 999 to report the incident, or the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Gas Safety Advice Line on 0800 300 363 don't go back into the property \u2013 wait for advice from the emergency services seek immediate medical help \u2013 you may not realise you've been affected by the carbon monoxide, and going outside into fresh air won't treat any exposure by itself Being aware of the signs It's very important to be aware of the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning and to look out for warning signs. You should suspect carbon monoxide poisoning if: other people in your house, flat or workplace fall ill with similar symptoms your symptoms disappear when you go away \u2013 for example, on holiday \u2013 and return when you come back your symptoms tend to be seasonal \u2013 for example, if you get headaches more often during the winter when the central heating is used more frequently your pets also become ill Other possible clues of a carbon monoxide leak include: black, sooty marks on the front covers of gas fires sooty or yellow\/brown stains on or around boilers, stoves or fires  smoke building up in rooms due to a faulty flue yellow instead of blue flames coming from gas appliances pilot lights frequently blowing out  At-risk groups  Carbon monoxide is a danger to everyone, but certain groups are more vulnerable than others. These include: babies and young children pregnant women people with chronic heart disease people with respiratory problems, such as asthma Pets are often the first to show signs of carbon monoxide poisoning. The smaller an animal or a person is, the faster they'll be affected. Investigate the possibility of a carbon monoxide leak if your pet suddenly becomes ill or dies unexpectedly, and their death isn't related to old age or an existing health condition. Page last reviewed: 23\/05\/2016 Next review due: 23\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 390 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 221  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Carbon monoxide poisoning Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Carbon monixide poisoning is incredibly dangerous so it's important to be vigilant. CO poisoning kills around 50 people a year in the UK. An expert explains how the gas affects the body, the symptoms it causes and how to treat it. CO poisoning can also be gradual over a period of time. Note: The Health Protection Agency no longer exists. Its role was taken over by Public Health England Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Dizziness Headache Shortness of breath Sick building syndrome External links Gas safe register Fire Service: carbon monoxide HETAS: advice on carbon monoxide Boat Safety Scheme HSE: gas safety Keep warm, keep well How to keep your home and family warm and healthy over the winter with the Keep warm, keep well campaign Workplace health Improve your health at work, with tips on dealing with stress, RSI, back pain, exercise and healthy lunches About A&E departments Find out when it is appropriate to go to A&E and what other services offer urgent care NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Carbuncles","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Boils","content":"Boils and carbuncles - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Boils and carbuncles  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Boils Clinical trials Boils and carbuncles Boils Treatment Boils Complications Boils Prevention Introduction  Boils and carbuncles are red, painful lumps on the skin. Boils Boils (furuncles) can develop anywhere on your skin, but they're most likely to occur at the site of an infected hair follicle (a hole a hair grows out of). Boils most commonly develop on areas of skin where there's a combination of hair, sweat and friction, such as the neck, face or thighs. Over time, pus forms inside the boil, causing it to grow larger and become more painful. In most cases, a boil will eventually burst and the pus will drain away without leaving a scar. This can take from two days to three weeks to happen. Boils are more common in teenagers and young adults, especially in males. Young males living in overcrowded and possibly unhygienic conditions are particularly at risk. Carbuncles A carbuncle is a dome-shaped collection of boils that usually develops over the space of a few days. They most often occur on the back, thighs, or the back of the neck. A fully grown carbuncle can be more than 10cm (4 inches) in size, and will leak pus from a number of points. You may also have other symptoms, such as: a high temperature of 38C (100.4F) or above a general feeling of being unwell feeling weak and exhausted Carbuncles are less common than boils and tend to occur mostly in middle-aged or older men in poor health or with a weakened immune system. When to see your GP Most boils burst and heal by themselves without the need for medical treatment. However, visit your GP for advice if you have a boil: on your face, nose or spine \u2013 this can sometimes cause serious complications that gets bigger and feels soft and spongy to touch \u2013 it may not burst and heal by itself that doesn't heal within two weeks You should also see your GP if you develop a carbuncle, or if you have additional symptoms such as a high temperature or feeling generally unwell. You GP should be able to identify a boil or carbuncle by looking at it. Causes of boils and carbuncles Boils and carbuncles are often caused by a type of bacteria known as Staphylococcus aureus (staph bacteria) infecting one or more hair follicles. Staph bacteria usually live harmlessly on the surface of the skin or in the lining of the nose. Boils tend to occur when the bacteria enters the skin through cuts and grazes. This causes your immune system to respond by sending infection-fighting white blood cells to kill the bacteria. Over time, a mix of dead bacteria, dead white blood cells and dead skin cells builds up inside the boil to form pus. A carbuncle develops when the infection spreads further beneath the skin to create a cluster of boils. Can I catch a boil or carbuncle? Yes, you can. Unlike acne, both boils and carbuncles can spread to another part of the body or to another person. Taking simple precautions, such as carefully disposing of used dressings and washing your hands after touching affected areas of skin, can help prevent boils and carbuncles spreading. Treating boils and carbuncles Most boils can be treated at home. One of the best ways to speed up healing is to apply a warm face cloth to the boil three or four times a day. If your boil doesn't heal, your GP may decide to drain it. Never attempt to squeeze or pierce a boil or carbuncle because it could cause the infection to spread and may lead to complications. If you develop a carbuncle or there's a high risk of your boil causing complications, you may be prescribed a week-long course of antibiotics. Further testing, such as taking a skin swab or a blood test, may be required if you have: a boil or carbuncle that keeps returning or doesn't respond to treatment \u2013 it may be caused by bacteria other than staph bacteria, so an antiseptic solution may be prescribed multiple boils or carbuncles a weakened immune system caused by a condition such as diabetes, or if you're having a treatment such as chemotherapy Read more about treating boils and carbuncles. Complications Although most boils get better without causing further problems, some people develop a secondary infection. This can range from a relatively minor (though often very painful) infection of the deeper layer of the skin, such as cellulitis, to rarer and more serious infections, such as blood poisoning (sepsis). Larger boils and carbuncles can also lead to scarring. Complications are more likely to occur if boils and carbuncles aren't treated properly. Read more about the possible complications of boils and carbuncles. Page last reviewed: 30\/01\/2015 Next review due: 30\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 477 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 259  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cellulitis Skin condition slideshows Skin health Staphylococcal infections External links The British Association of Dermatologists: boils Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Teen boys 15-18 Turning into a couch potato? Want the truth about drugs and safer sex? Find out how you can get yourself sorted Find and choose services for Boils and carbuncles Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/CEA-test","content":"Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview CEA test Introduction  A carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test is used to check how well treatment is working in certain types of cancer, particularly colon cancer. Carcinoembryonic antigens are harmful substances (usually proteins) that are produced by some types of cancer. In response to the antigens, the body produces antibodies to help fight them. A CEA test is often carried out after surgery to check carcinoembryonic antigen levels. As well as being a useful marker in cases of colon cancer, CEA tests can also be used to assess other types of cancer including: rectal cancer lung cancer breast cancer liver cancer pancreatic cancer stomach cancer ovarian cancer Read more about the CEA test at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 01\/10\/2015 Next review due: 01\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 29 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Cancer External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Carcinoid syndrome and carcinoid tumours","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/carcinoid-syndrome","content":"Carcinoid syndrome and carcinoid tumours - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Carcinoid syndrome and carcinoid tumours  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview carcinoid-syndrome Clinical trials Carcinoid syndrome Introduction  A carcinoid tumour is a rare cancer of the neuroendocrine system \u2013 the body system that produces hormones. The tumour usually grows in the bowels or appendix, but it can also be found in the stomach, pancreas, lung, breast, kidney, ovaries or testicles. It tends to grow very slowly. \"Carcinoid syndrome\" is the collection of symptoms some people get when a carcinoid tumour \u2013 usually one that has spread to the liver \u2013 releases hormones such as serotonin into the bloodstream. About 1,200 people are diagnosed with a carcinoid tumour each year in the UK, but it's thought that less than 1 in 10 of them will have carcinoid syndrome. Signs and symptoms In the early stages of having a carcinoid tumour, you may not have any symptoms. You may also not have symptoms if the tumour is just in your digestive system, as any hormones it produces will be broken down by your liver. If symptoms do develop, they tend to be fairly general and can be easily mistaken for signs of other illnesses. Symptoms may result from both the tumour itself and from any hormones it releases into the bloodstream. Symptoms caused by the tumour Symptoms will depend on where in the body the tumour develops: A bowel carcinoid tumour may cause tummy pain, a blocked bowel (diarrhoea, constipation, feeling or being sick) and bleeding from the bottom (rectal bleeding). A lung carcinoid tumour may cause a cough, which may make you cough up blood, and cause wheezing, breathlessness, chest pain and tiredness. A stomach carcinoid tumour may cause pain, weight loss, tiredness and weakness. Some tumours may not cause any symptoms and are discovered by chance. For example, an appendix carcinoid tumour may only be found when the appendix is being removed for another reason. Symptoms caused by the hormones (carcinoid syndrome) Typical symptoms of carcinoid syndrome include: diarrhoea, tummy pain and loss of appetite flushing of the skin, particularly the face fast heart rate breathlessness and wheezing These symptoms may come on unexpectedly, as the hormones can be produced by the tumour at any time. Some people may also develop carcinoid heart disease, where the heart valves thicken and stop working properly. There is also a risk of developing a rare but serious reaction called a carcinoid crisis, which involves severe flushing, breathlessness and a drop in blood pressure. What causes carcinoid tumours? It's not known exactly why carcinoid tumours develop, but it's thought that most occur by chance. Your chances of developing a carcinoid tumour may be increased if you have: a rare family syndrome called multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) parents or siblings with a carcinoid tumour parents with squamous cell skin cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, or cancer of the brain, breast, liver, womb, bladder or kidney conditions called neurofibromatosis or tuberous sclerosis You can read more about the possible risk factors for carcinoid tumours on the Cancer Research UK website. Diagnosing carcinoid tumours A carcinoid tumour may be found incidentally \u2013 for example, as a surgeon is removing an appendix. In this case, the tumour will often be caught early and removed along with the appendix, causing no further problems. Otherwise, people usually see their GP after they have developed symptoms, and a carcinoid tumour may be diagnosed after carrying out a series of scans and tests, which may include measuring the amount of serotonin in your urine and having an endoscopy. You can read more about the tests for carcinoid tumours on the Cancer Research UK website. Treating carcinoid tumours and carcinoid syndrome If the tumour is caught early, it may be possible to completely remove it and cure the cancer altogether. Otherwise, surgeons will remove as much of the tumour as possible (debulking). You can read more about the surgery for carcinoid tumours on the Cancer Research UK website. If the tumour cannot be removed, but it's not growing or causing symptoms, you may not need treatment straight away \u2013 it might just be carefully monitored.  If it's causing symptoms, you may be offered one of the following treatments: injections of medicines called somatostatin analogues, such as octreotide and lanreotide, which can slow down the growth of the tumour radiotherapy to kill some of the cancer cells \u2013 Cancer Research UK has more information on the two main options: targeted radiotherapy and external beam radiotherapy a procedure to block the blood supply to the tumour (for tumours in the liver), known as hepatic artery embolisation a procedure that uses a heated probe to kill cancer cells (for tumours in the liver), called radiofrequency ablation chemotherapy to shrink the tumour and control your symptoms Symptoms of carcinoid syndrome can be treated with injections of octreotide and lanreotide. You may also be given medication to widen your airways (to relieve wheezing and breathlessness) and anti-diarrhoea medication. What can I do to help myself? There are things you can do yourself to manage some of the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome. Generally, you should avoid triggers of flushing, such as: alcohol large meals spicy foods foods containing the substance tyramine, such as aged cheese and salted or pickled meats stress Some medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants, may make symptoms worse by further increasing your levels of serotonin \u2013 but never stop taking medication without seeking medical advice. If you have diarrhoea, it's important to keep drinking little and often to avoid dehydration. Outlook If the whole tumour can be removed, this may cure the cancer and symptoms altogether. But even if surgeons cannot remove the entire tumour, it usually grows slowly and can be controlled with medication. Overall, people with carcinoid tumours have a good life expectancy compared to many other cancers, with around 70-80% surviving at least five years from diagnosis. Many people remain relatively well and lead active lives, with only occasional symptoms. But as the tumour grows or spreads, it will produce more and more hormones, and it may eventually be difficult to completely control symptoms with medication. You may need further surgery or other treatments. Unfortunately, life expectancy is not as good for cancer that has spread to other parts of your body, because it won't usually be possible to remove all of it. However, treatment can still control your symptoms and slow down the spread of cancer. You can read more about the statistics and outlook for carcinoid on the Cancer Research UK website. Information about you If you have carcinoid syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 15\/05\/2015 Next review due: 15\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 99 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Living with cancer Neuroendocrine tumours Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: carcinoid syndrome Cancer Research UK: carcinoid tumours Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cardiac catheterisation and coronary angiography","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/CoronaryAngiography","content":"Cardiac catheterisation and coronary angiography - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cardiac catheterisation and coronary angiography  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview CoronaryAngiography Clinical trials Coronary angiography CoronaryAngiography Why they're used CoronaryAngiography How they're performed CoronaryAngiography Recovery CoronaryAngiography Risks Introduction  Cardiac catheterisation is an invasive diagnostic procedure that provides important information about the structure and function of the heart. It usually involves taking X-rays of the heart's arteries (coronary arteries) using a technique called coronary angiography or arteriography. The resulting images are known as coronary angiograms or arteriograms. Why do I need coronary angiography? Coronary angiography can be used to help diagnose heart conditions, help plan future treatments and carry out certain procedures. For example, it may be used: after a heart attack \u2013 where the heart's blood supply is blocked to help diagnose angina \u2013 where pain in the chest is caused by restricted blood supply to the heart to plan interventional or surgical procedures \u2013 such as a coronary angioplasty, where narrowed or blocked blood vessels are widened Coronary angiography is also considered to be the best method of diagnosing coronary heart disease (where a build-up of fatty substances in the coronary arteries affects the heart's blood supply). Read more about why coronary angiography is used. What happens during coronary angiography? During the procedure, a long, thin and flexible tube called a catheter is inserted into a blood vessel in your groin or arm. Using X-ray images as a guide, the tip of the catheter is passed up to the heart and coronary arteries. A special type of dye called contrast medium is injected into the catheter and X-ray images (angiograms) are taken. The contrast medium is visible on the angiograms, showing the blood vessels that the fluid travels through. This clearly highlights any blood vessels that are narrowed or blocked. The procedure is usually carried out under local anaesthetic, so you'll be awake while the procedure is carried out, but the area where the catheter is inserted will be numbed. Read more about how coronary angiography is performed. After coronary angiography You'll usually be able to leave hospital on the same day you have a coronary angiography, after a period of rest and observation. Most people feel fine a day or so after having the procedure, although you may feel a bit tired afterwards and the wound site is likely to be tender for up to a week. Any bruising may last for several weeks. You'll usually be advised to avoid certain activities \u2013 such as bathing, driving and lifting heavy objects \u2013 for a day or two after the procedure. While you're recovering, it's important to look out for signs of any problems. You should seek immediate medical attention if swelling at the site of your wound gets worse, or if you experience excessive bleeding or circulation problems in your limbs. Read more about recovering from coronary angiography. Complications Cardiac catheterisation and coronary angiography are usually very safe. However, as with all procedures, there are some risks, including: being allergic to the contrast dye \u2013 this is uncommon, but you should discuss any allergies that you have with your cardiologist (heart specialist) before having the procedure bleeding under the skin where the catheter was inserted \u2013 this should stop after a few days, but you should contact your GP if you're concerned about it a very small risk of more serious complications, including damage to the artery in the arm or leg where the catheter was inserted, heart attack, stroke, kidney damage and, very rarely, death  Read more about the risks of coronary angiography. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 19\/01\/2016 Next review due: 19\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 198 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 129  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your guide to a coronary angiogram Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Do you have a coronary angiogram coming up? Watch this video to find out what to expect. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Coronary angioplasty Coronary heart disease Heart attack Healthy hearts External links British Heart Foundation Heart UK Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Lower your cholesterol Foods you can eat and those you should avoid to help lower your cholesterol How to look after your heart Poor diet, lack of exercise and smoking are the main offenders behind the UK's high level of deaths from heart disease Find and choose services for coronary angiography Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cardiomyopathy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cardiomyopathy","content":"Cardiomyopathy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cardiomyopathy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Cardiomyopathy is a general term for diseases of the heart muscle, where the walls of the heart chambers have become stretched, thickened or stiff. This affects the heart's ability to pump blood around the body. Some types of cardiomyopathy are inherited and are seen in children and younger people. This page explains the main types of cardiomyopathy: dilated cardiomyopathy hypertrophic cardiomyopathy restrictive cardiomyopathy arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy takotsubo cardiomyopathy or 'broken heart syndrome' It then explains:  diagnosing cardiomyopathy treating cardiomyopathy information about you Dilated cardiomyopathy In dilated cardiomyopathy the muscle walls of the heart have become stretched and thin, so they can't contract (squeeze) properly to pump blood around the body. How serious is it? If you have dilated cardiomyopathy, you're at greater risk of heart failure, where the heart fails to pump enough blood around the body at the right pressure. Heart failure typically causes shortness of breath, extreme tiredness and ankle swelling. Learn more about the symptoms of heart failure. There's also a risk of heart valve problems, an irregular heartbeat and blood clots. You'll need to have regular appointments with your GP so the disease can be monitored. Who's affected? Dilated cardiomyopathy can affect both children and adults.  The heart muscle can become stretched if you have an unhealthy lifestyle or an underlying medical condition, or both. The following can all play a role in the disease: uncontrolled high blood pressure an unhealthy lifestyle \u2013 such as a lack of vitamins and minerals in the diet, heavy drinking and recreational drug use a viral infection that causes inflammation of the heart muscle   a heart valve problem a disease of the body tissues or vessels \u2013 such as Wegener's granulomatosis, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, lupus, polyarteritis nodosa, vasculitis or muscular dystrophy inheriting a mutated (changed) gene that makes you more vulnerable to the disease pregnancy \u2013 cardiomyopathy can sometimes develop as a complication of pregnancy But for many people, the cause is unknown. More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on living with dilated cardiomyopathy. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the heart muscle cells have enlarged and the walls of the heart chambers thicken. The chambers are reduced in size so they can't hold much blood, and the walls can't relax properly and may stiffen. How serious is it? Most people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy will be able to live a full, normal life. Some people don't even have symptoms and don't need treatment. But that doesn't mean the condition can't be serious. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common cause of sudden unexpected death in childhood and in young athletes. The main heart chambers can become stiff, leading to back pressure on the smaller collecting chambers. This can sometimes worsen the symptoms of heart failure and lead to abnormal heart rhythms (atrial fibrillation). Blood flow from the heart may become reduced or restricted (known as obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). Also, the mitral heart valve can become leaky, causing blood to leak backwards. Read more about mitral regurgitation. These heart changes can cause dizziness, chest pain, shortness of breath and temporary loss of consciousness. You'll also be at greater risk of developing endocarditis (a heart infection). If you have severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, you'll need to see your doctor regularly so your condition can be monitored. Your doctor will advise about the level and amount of exercise you can do and sensible lifestyle changes to make.  Who's affected? Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is thought to affect 1 in 500 people in the UK. Most people inherit the disease from their parents. Read more about how genetic conditions are inherited.   More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on living with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Restrictive cardiomyopathy Restrictive cardiomyopathy is rare and mostly affects older adults. The walls of the main heart chambers become stiffened and rigid and can't relax properly after contracting. This means the heart can't fill up properly with blood. It results in reduced blood flow from the heart and can lead to symptoms of heart failure, such as breathlessness, tiredness and ankle swelling, as well as heart rhythm problems. In many cases the cause is unknown, although sometimes it can be inherited. More information Read the American Heart Association's leaflet on restrictive cardiomyopathy (PDF, 102kb). Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy In arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), the proteins that normally hold the heart muscle cells together are abnormal. Muscle cells can die and the dead muscle tissue is replaced with fatty and fibrous tissue. The walls of the main heart chambers become thin and stretched, and can't pump blood around the body properly. People with ARVC typically have heart rhythm problems. Reduced blood flow from the heart can also lead to symptoms of heart failure. ARVC is an uncommon inherited condition caused by a mutation (change) in one or more genes. It can affect teenagers or young adults and has been the reason for some sudden unexplained deaths in young athletes. There's increasing evidence that prolonged, strenuous exercise worsens the symptoms of ARVC. It's important that people with or at risk of ARVC have a careful discussion about this with their cardiologist. More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on ARVC. Diagnosing cardiomyopathy Some cases of cardiomyopathy can be diagnosed after various heart scans and tests, such as an electrocardiogram (ECG) and an echocardiogram. Cardiomyopathy that runs in the family can be diagnosed after a genetic test. If you've been diagnosed with cardiomyopathy, you may be advised to have a genetic test to identify the mutation (faulty gene) that caused this. Your relatives can then be tested for the same mutation and, if they have it, their condition can be monitored and managed early. Treating cardiomyopathy  There's no cure for cardiomyopathy, but the treatments described below are usually effective at controlling symptoms and preventing complications. Not everyone with cardiomyopathy will need treatment. Some people only have a mild form of the disease that they can control after making a few lifestyle changes. Lifestyle changes If the cause of your cardiomyopathy isn't genetic, it should generally help to: follow a healthy diet and take gentle exercise quit smoking (if you smoke) lose weight (if you're overweight) avoid or reduce your intake of alcohol  get plenty of sleep manage stress make sure any underlying condition, such as diabetes, is well controlled  Medication Medication may be needed to control blood pressure, correct an abnormal heart rhythm, remove excess fluid or prevent blood clots.  Read about: medication for high blood pressure beta-blockers to treat an irregular heartbeat or heart failure diuretics to remove excess fluid from your body if this has caused swelling anticoagulants such as warfarin to prevent blood clots medication to treat heart failure Hospital procedures In some people with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the septum (the wall dividing the left and right side of the heart) is thickened and bulges into the main heart chamber. They may need to have either: an injection of alcohol into their heart \u2013 this is to reduce part of the muscle in the septum a septal myectomy \u2013 heart surgery to remove part of the thickened septum (the mitral valve may be repaired at the same time, if necessary) Those with heart rhythm problems may need to have a pacemaker, or a similar device, implanted to control their abnormal heart rhythm. Read more about having a pacemaker fitted. As a last resort, a heart transplant may be necessary. Information about you If you have cardiomyopathy, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. GOV.UK has more information about the register. Broken heart syndrome Some people who sustain significant emotional or physical stress, such as bereavement or major surgery, go on to experience a temporary heart problem. The heart muscle becomes suddenly weakened or \"stunned\", causing the left ventricle (one of the heart's main chambers) to change shape. It may be caused by a surge of hormones, particularly adrenaline, during this period of stress. The main symptoms are chest pain and breathlessness, similar to those of a heart attack \u2013 always call 999 if you or someone else experiences these. The condition \u2013 known medically as Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, or acute stress cardiomyopathy \u2013 is temporary and reversible. It's unusual for it to happen again. Source: British Heart Foundation Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/06\/2016 Next review due: 23\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 82 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Congenital heart disease Endocarditis Heart failure Valve replacement External links British Heart Foundation: cardiomyopathy The Cardiomyopathy Association Arrhythmias Find out what you need to know about arrhythmias or heart rhythm problems Is your blood pressure too high? At least 25% of adults have high blood pressure. Get tips on how to keep healthy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Accidents-and-first-aid\/Pages\/CPR.aspx","content":"First aid - CPR - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories First aid - CPR  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Accidents-and-first-aid Clinical trials First aid Accidents-and-first-aid After an incident Accidents-and-first-aid CPR Accidents-and-first-aid Recovery position CPR  This page provides information and guidance about hands-only cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and CPR with rescue breaths. Hands-only CPR To carry out a chest compression: Place the heel of your hand on the breastbone at the centre of the person\u2019s chest. Place your other hand on top of your first hand and interlock your fingers. Position yourself with your shoulders above your hands. Using your body weight (not just your arms), press straight down by 5-6cm (2-2.5 inches) on their chest. Keeping your hands on their chest, release the compression and allow the chest to return to its original position.   Repeat these compressions at a rate of 100 to 120 times per minute until an ambulance arrives or you become exhausted. When you call for an ambulance, telephone systems now exist that can give basic life-saving instructions, including advice about CPR. These are now common and are easily accessible with mobile phones. CPR with rescue breaths If you\u2019ve been trained in CPR, including rescue breaths, and feel confident using your skills, you should give chest compressions with rescue breaths. If you're not completely confident, attempt hands-only CPR instead (see above). Adults Place the heel of your hand on the centre of the person's chest, then place the other hand on top and press down by 5-6cm (2-2.5 inches) at a steady rate of 100 to 120 compressions per minute. After every 30 chest compressions, give two rescue breaths. Tilt the casualty's head gently and lift the chin up with two fingers. Pinch the person\u2019s nose. Seal your mouth over their mouth and blow steadily and firmly into their mouth for about one second. Check that their chest rises. Give two rescue breaths. Continue with cycles of 30 chest compressions and two rescue breaths until they begin to recover or emergency help arrives. Children over one year old Open the child's airway by placing one hand on the child\u2019s forehead and gently tilting their head back and lifting the chin. Remove any visible obstructions from the mouth and nose. Pinch their nose. Seal your mouth over their mouth and blow steadily and firmly into their mouth, checking that their chest rises. Give five initial rescue breaths. Place the heel of one hand on the centre of their chest and push down by 5cm (about two inches), which is approximately one-third of the chest diameter. The quality (depth) of chest compressions is very important. Use two hands if you can't achieve a depth of 5cm using one hand. After every 30 chest compressions at a rate of 100 to 120 per minute, give two breaths. Continue with cycles of 30 chest compressions and two rescue breaths until they begin to recover or emergency help arrives. Infants under one year old Open the infant's airway by placing one hand on their forehead and gently tilting the head back and lifting the chin. Remove any visible obstructions from the mouth and nose. Place your mouth over the mouth and nose of the infant and blow steadily and firmly into their mouth, checking that their chest rises. Give five initial rescue breaths. Place two fingers in the middle of the chest and push down by 4cm (about 1.5 inches), which is approximately one-third of the chest diameter. The quality (depth) of chest compressions is very important. Use the heel of one hand if you can't achieve a depth of 4cm using the tips of two fingers. After 30 chest compressions at a rate of 100 to 120 per minute, give two rescue breaths. Continue with cycles of 30 chest compressions and two rescue breaths until they begin to recover or emergency help arrives. Page last reviewed: 08\/01\/2016 Next review due: 08\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 426 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 248  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Vinnie Jones: Hard and Fast - hands-only CPR Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Watch Vinnie Jones perform hands-only CPR to the beat of Stayin' Alive. CPR is not as hard as you may think. Just call 999 and then push Hard and Fast. This video was produced by the British Heart Foundation Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links When to dial 999 Baby and toddler safety Black eye Find services: A&E Find services: Minor injuries units External links St John Ambulance: courses British Red Cross: courses RoSPA: accident prevention St. Andrews First Aid Resuscitation Council (UK) Child Accident Prevention Trust Accidents, first aid and safety How to prevent accidents and what to do if your child has one How to resuscitate a child A step-by-step guide to resuscitating a child who has stopped breathing or whose heart has stopped. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cardiovascular disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cardiovascular-disease","content":"Cardiovascular disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cardiovascular disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cardiovascular-disease Community Cardiovascular disease cardiovascular-disease Risk factors cardiovascular-disease Prevention - adults cardiovascular-disease Prevention - children Introduction  Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a general term that describes a disease of the heart or blood vessels. Blood flow to the heart, brain or body can be reduced as the result of a blood clot (thrombosis), or by a build-up of fatty deposits inside an artery that cause the artery to harden and narrow (atherosclerosis). Types of CVD There are four main types of CVD. They are: coronary heart disease stroke peripheral arterial disease aortic disease Coronary heart disease Coronary heart disease (CHD) occurs when the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your heart is blocked or reduced by a build-up of fatty material (atheroma) in the coronary arteries. The coronary arteries are the two major blood vessels that supply your heart with blood. As they narrow because of a build-up of atheroma, the blood supply to your heart will be restricted. This can cause angina (chest pain). If a coronary artery becomes completely blocked, it can cause a heart attack. Read more about coronary heart disease. Stroke A stroke is a serious medical condition that occurs when the blood supply to part of the brain is cut off. Like all organs, the brain needs a constant supply of oxygen and nutrients to function properly. This is provided by the blood, so if your blood flow is restricted or stopped, brain cells will begin to die. This can cause brain damage and possibly death. A stroke is therefore a medical emergency and prompt treatment is essential. The sooner a person who has had a stroke receives treatment, the less damage is likely to occur. The main symptoms of stroke can be remembered with the word FAST, which stands for: Face \u2013 the face may have drooped on one side, the person may be unable to smile, or their mouth or eye may have drooped Arms \u2013 the person may be unable to lift their arm and keep it raised because of weakness or numbness Speech \u2013 the person's speech may be slurred or garbled, or they may not be able to talk at all Time \u2013 it's time to dial 999 immediately if you see any of these signs or symptoms Read more about stroke and recognising the signs of stroke. Peripheral arterial disease Peripheral arterial disease, also known as peripheral vascular disease, occurs when there's a blockage in the arteries to your limbs (usually your legs). The most common symptom of peripheral arterial disease is pain in your legs when walking. This is usually in one or both of your thighs, hips or calves. The pain can feel like cramp, a dull pain or a sensation of heaviness in your leg muscles. It usually comes and goes, and gets worse during exercise that uses your legs, such as walking or climbing stairs. Read more about peripheral arterial disease. Aortic disease The aorta is the largest blood vessel in the body. It carries blood from your heart to the rest of your body. The most common type of aortic disease is an aortic aneurysm, where the wall of the aorta becomes weakened and bulges outwards. You'll usually experience pain in your chest, back or abdomen (tummy). Risk factors for CVD There are a number of risk factors for CVD, including: high blood pressure (hypertension) smoking high blood cholesterol diabetes lack of exercise being overweight or obese a family history of heart disease ethnic background The amount of alcohol you drink and how you deal with stress are also thought to be linked to the risk of developing CVD. Read more about these risk factors for CVD. Preventing CVD Most deaths caused by cardiovascular disease are premature and could easily be prevented by making lifestyle changes, such as eating healthily, exercising regularly and stopping smoking. Addressing one risk factor, such as giving up smoking, will bring important health benefits, but to significantly reduce your risk of developing CVD you need to look at your lifestyle as a whole. In particular, you need to consider: your diet your weight how much alcohol you drink how much exercise you do whether you need to stop smoking Read more about preventing cardiovascular disease in adulthood. Children  Evidence shows that eating and drinking habits established during childhood can continue for many years into adulthood. Bad eating habits during childhood may not pose an immediate health risk, but they could lead to serious health problems in adulthood. Four important things to consider are the amount of: fat in your child's diet salt in your child's diet sugar in your child's diet exercise your child does Read more about preventing cardiovascular disease during childhood. Cardiac risk assessment Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out how a cardiovascular risk assessment can detect whether you're at risk of heart disease. Media last reviewed: 25\/04\/2015 Next review due: 25\/04\/2017 Public health problem Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a big health problem. In 2011, there were almost 160,000 deaths as a result of CVD. Around 74,000 of these deaths were caused by coronary heart disease, which is the UK's biggest killer. Most deaths from heart disease are caused by heart attacks. In the UK, there are about 103,000 heart attacks each year. There are also around 152,000 strokes in the UK each year, resulting in more than 41,000 deaths. Page last reviewed: 15\/09\/2014 Next review due: 15\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 240 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atherosclerosis Coronary heart disease Healthy weight calculator Heart health High blood pressure External links British Heart Foundation Heart UK: health and high cholesterol NICE: preventing CVD Community content from HealthUnlocked Coronary heart disease Coronary heart disease is responsible for more deaths than any other health condition, both in the UK and worldwide. Find out what you can do to avoid it Stroke A stroke occurs when the blood supply to part of the brain is cut off. It's a serious condition that should be treated as a medical emergency Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Care and support guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/social-care-and-support-guide","content":"Your guide to care and support - Care and support guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Your guide to care and support What's your situation? I need care I need help at home I'm leaving hospital I want advice about paying for care I want to plan for my future care needs I want advice on choosing services I'm worried someone is being badly treated I'm unhappy with my care and support I need help caring for someone My child has a disability I'm a young carer I need a break from caring Care and support: what's changing? Find your local social services Care services and advice How to get care services Your right to care and support Assessing your care needs Carers' assessments Care after discharge from hospital Care and support plans Choosing care services What is personalisation? Mental health: Care Programme Approach Special educational needs support Transition planning for young people with support needs Types of services What care services are available? Care equipment, aids and adaptations Mobility equipment, wheelchairs and scooters Telecare and alarms Accessible toys, play and learning Care at home (homecare) Supported living services Care homes Shared lives schemes Housing options Children and young people's services Transport and getting around with mobility issues Wellbeing advice Abuse or neglect of vulnerable adults Accessible breaks, activities and day trips Meals, nutrition and feeding Medicines: tips for carers Personal hygiene for cared-for people Thinking about the future? There's no better time to plan for your future care needs than right now. Find out all about how to arrange and fund the care that you'll need one day Find your local social services Staying independent with dementia Carers Direct helpline service Money and your rights Funding care How to fund your care Paying for your own care Council funding for care Direct payments and personal budgets NHS continuing healthcare Mental health aftercare Disability benefits Personal Independence Payment Disability Living Allowance Attendance Allowance Constant Attendance Allowance Health costs Financial help with health and care if you're on a low income Means-tested benefits Pension Credit Income Support Employment and Support Allowance Jobseeker's Allowance Housing Benefit Claiming benefits Challenging a benefit decision Tax and tax credits Help paying Council Tax Tax credits Rights The Equality Act Decision-making and mental capacity Power of attorney Legal help Advocacy The Care Act and your rights Work Disability in the workplace Complaints How to make a complaint How does the Care Act affect you? Coping financially when you're terminally ill Find local social services For carers Carers' rights Carers and the Care Act Carers' assessments Carers' assessments: what happens next Carers' employment rights Returning to work as a carer Young carers' rights Money and legal Carers' benefits Carer's Allowance Claiming Carer's Allowance Challenging a Carer's Allowance decision Benefits for carers who aren't working Carers' Credit Claiming means-tested benefits Financial help for parent carers Carers Direct helpline service Caring issues Caring and communication difficulties Dealing with challenging behaviour Moving and handling someone else Caring and sharing your home When someone you care for dies Parenting a child with complex needs Tips on caring for a disabled child Who can help young carers? Need a break from caring? You may need a break from time to time, to look after your own health and wellbeing. Your carer's assessment can help you get one Caring for someone with dementia Video: caring for a parent Find your local social services You are here: Health A-Z Your guide to care and support Share: Save: Print: Your guide to care and support Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. NHS: how the care system works Media last reviewed: 19\/08\/2016 Next review due: 19\/08\/2019 This guide is for people who have care and support needs, their carers and people who are planning for their future care needs. The green tabs at the top of every page will help you to easily navigate the site. Just hover your cursor over each tab and select the page you want from the dropdown menu. If you can't find what you're after, try the search box at the top of the page \u2013 it covers everything on the wider NHS Choices site, including information on conditions and treatments, and advice to help you live a healthier lifestyle or boost your mental wellbeing. Get started Popular topics in this guide include: Assessing your care needs Planning for your future care needs What care services are available locally? Care at home (homecare) NHS continuing healthcare Funding care and support Advice for carers includes: Carer's Allowance Benefits for carers Caring for a child with complex needs Young carers' rights Carers Direct helpline service Below are some commonly asked questions about care and support. What are care and support services? Care and support services, also known as social care services, help people who are in need of practical support due to illness, disability, old age or a low income.  Care and support services could include having a personal assistant to help you around the home, structural changes to help you move around or manage in your house, or even an alarm system so that you can call for help if you have a fall. Social care services are available to everyone, regardless of their background. However, social care is subject to rules about your needs and ability. Services can also support the families or carers of people who receive social care. Find out more about your rights and entitlements to social care. How are care and support services funded? Local authorities (councils) are responsible for providing social care services for those who need them and are eligible for them. After assessing your needs and finances, the local authority may agree to pay for some or all of the care and support you need. These council-funded social care services may be provided by \u2018independent providers\u2019 \u2013 firms or charities that specialise in providing social care services. Find out more about funding care services. Even though most people have to fund all or part of their own care and support, local authorities have a duty to assess everyone\u2019s care and support needs, and advise you on relevant local services. Social care services can take many forms \u2013 you can get help from them while you live at home, out and about in the community, or even in a new place of residence such as a care home. To find out more, read choosing care and arranging care. How can social care help disabled people? Social care services can help and support people with disabilities to live more independently. Even if you are not eligible for free social care, you may still have a right to receive benefits and other financial help or access to equipment and concessions on transport or the Blue Badge Parking Scheme. Details on these, together with information on disability rights under the Equality Act and in the workplace, can be found in this guide and on GOV.UK. Read more about living with a disability with help from social care services. How can social care help older people? Most local authorities will have a social care team devoted to older people. These teams can provide support that enables older people to remain living independently in their own home. The local authority's team for older people will also be able to guide you through the options available if you are no longer able to live at home independently, for instance in sheltered accommodation, extra care housing, or care and nursing homes. I look after someone. Can social care help me? If you are looking after an ill, disabled or frail elderly relative or friend, you should recognise yourself as a carer. Carers can get a range of support from social care, and can be vital for helping arrange social care support for the person they care for. There are charities that support particular groups of carers, including sibling carers and young carers. If you want to talk to someone about how to get support as a carer, call the Carers Direct helpline on 0300 123 1053. How can social care help my child? If you're worried about your child's general development or wellbeing and you think they need additional support, you should speak to your child\u2019s GP or teacher first. If you or your child need more significant support, contact the children\u2019s services team in your local authority for a needs assessment. This assessment of your child\u2019s needs will be used to determine if they need more specialised support, including any special educational needs your child may have. You should be involved in any decisions about your child, including what help will be provided to meet their needs. This guide also provides tips for caring for a disabled child and links to further help. Council help for children Each local authority will have people dealing specifically with social care for children. Use the GOV.UK website to find your local council and get advice about an assessment for children\u2019s services. How good are my local authority social services? If you are receiving care, looking after someone who receives care, or just planning for your future care, it\u2019s worth finding out how well your local authority\u2019s social care services are performing. You can check how care services in your area are performing against measures in the Adult Social Care Outcomes Framework (ASCOF). This will let you find out how carers and people receiving local authority funded care and support in your area rate: their quality of life  their satisfaction with care services  feeling safe Alongside these are the levels of social services that the local authority offers, such as: the number of people receiving direct payments  the number of permanent admissions to care homes delayed transfers of care from hospitals You can also compare these with national and regional averages, to see whether your local authority is doing well, or could be performing better. Page last reviewed: 15\/01\/2015 Next review due: 15\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 265 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Care and support services Find services near you Find and compare services Services Care at home Care home with nursing Care home without nursing Carers Shared lives Supported living services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Assessing your care and support needs A care and support assessment is the best way for you to get help and advice from your local authority if you have difficulty looking after yourself Caring for children with complex needs A child might have complex needs from birth, or following an illness or injury. Find out what support is available Your right to social care and support Local authorities have a duty to assess anyone who appears to need care and support What social care services are available? Find out about the social care services that can help disabled people and other people who need them Local authority funding for care All about how your council may give you free or subsidised care services if you have a particular level of needs Call the Carers Direct helpline The Carers Direct helpline (0300 123 1053) offers confidential information and advice for carers NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Carotid endarterectomy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/CarotidEndarterectomy","content":"Carotid endarterectomy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Carotid endarterectomy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Carotidendarterectomy Real stories Carotidendarterectomy Clinical trials Carotid endarterectomy Carotidendarterectomy When it's needed Carotidendarterectomy Preparation Carotidendarterectomy How it's performed Carotidendarterectomy Recovery Carotidendarterectomy Risks Carotidendarterectomy Alternatives Introduction  Carotid endarterectomy is a surgical procedure to unblock a carotid artery. The carotid arteries are the main blood vessels that supply the head and neck. Carotid endarterectomies are carried out when one or both carotid arteries become narrowed because of a build-up of fatty deposits (plaque). This is known as carotid artery disease or carotid artery stenosis. If a narrowed carotid artery is left untreated, blood flow to the brain may be affected. This is usually because a blood clot forms and a piece breaks off and goes to the brain. This can result in either: a stroke \u2013 a serious medical condition that can cause brain damage or death a transient ischaemic attack (TIA) \u2013 sometimes known as a \"mini-stroke\", a TIA is similar to a stroke but the signs and symptoms are temporary and usually disappear within 24 hours Each year around 110,000 people have a stroke in the UK and around a quarter of these are caused by a narrowing of the carotid arteries. More than 5,000 carotid endarterectomy procedures were performed on the NHS between 2011 and 2012. Carotid endarterectomy can significantly reduce the risk of a stroke in people with severely narrowed carotid arteries. In people who have previously had a stroke or a TIA, their risk of having another stroke or TIA within the next three years is reduced by a third after surgery. It's now thought the operation should be performed as soon as possible after symptoms appear. It's important to seek immediate medical advice if you experience symptoms such as: numbness or weakness in the face, arm or leg speech problems loss of vision in one eye Read more about when carotid endarterectomy is needed. About the procedure Carotid endarterectomy can be carried out using either local anaesthetic or general anaesthetic. The advantage of local anaesthetic is it allows the surgeon to monitor brain function while you're awake. However, there's no evidence that either is safer or better. During the procedure, a 7-10cm (2.5-4 inch) cut will be made between the corner of your jaw and your breastbone. A small cut is then made along the narrowed section of artery, and the fatty deposits that have built up are removed. The artery is then closed with stitches or a patch and your skin is also closed with stitches. Read more about: getting ready for carotid endarterectomy how carotid endarterectomy is performed What happens after the procedure You'll usually be moved to the recovery area of the operating theatre for monitoring. Most people are well enough to go home within about 48 hours of the procedure. In most cases, the only problems experienced after the operation are temporary numbness or discomfort in the neck. However, there's a small risk of more serious complications, which can include stroke or death in around 3% of cases. Nevertheless, this risk is much lower than in people with carotid artery disease who haven't chosen to have the operation. Read more about:  recovering from carotid endarterectomy risks of carotid endarterectomy Are there any alternatives? Carotid endarterectomy is the main treatment for narrowing of the carotid arteries, but sometimes an alternative procedure called carotid artery stent placement may be available. This is a less invasive procedure than a carotid endarterectomy because it doesn't involve a cut being made in the neck. Instead, a thin flexible tube is guided to the carotid artery through a small cut in the groin. A mesh cylinder (stent) is then placed into the narrowed section of artery to widen it and allow blood to flow through it more easily. Carotid stenting is currently thought to be associated with a higher risk of stroke during the procedure, especially if it's performed in the first few days after symptoms appear. However, it's a useful alternative for people who may be at a higher risk of complications from an operation. Read more about carotid artery stent placement. Page last reviewed: 20\/08\/2015 Next review due: 20\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 146 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Carotid artery Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Carotid endarterectomy is an operation to remove the inner lining of the carotid artery, a blood vessel in the neck, to prevent a stroke. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Atherosclerosis Having an operation Stroke Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) External links Different Strokes National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke The Stroke Association Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you 'I'm a stroke survivor' A stroke forced Jim Whyte to give up work. Now he makes a point of living an active, healthy life. Hear his story Find and choose services for Carotid endarterectomy Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Carpal tunnel syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Carpal-tunnel-syndrome","content":"Carpal tunnel syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Carpal tunnel syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Carpal-tunnel-syndrome Real stories Carpal-tunnel-syndrome Clinical trials Carpal tunnel syndrome Carpal-tunnel-syndrome Symptoms Carpal-tunnel-syndrome Causes Carpal-tunnel-syndrome Diagnosis Carpal-tunnel-syndrome Treatment Introduction  Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a relatively common condition that causes a tingling sensation, numbness and sometimes pain in the hand and fingers. Usually, these sensations develop gradually and start off being worse during the night. They tend to affect the thumb, index finger and middle finger. Other symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome include: pins and needles (paraesthesia) thumb weakness a dull ache in the hand or arm Read more about the symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). What causes carpal tunnel syndrome? Carpal tunnel syndrome is caused by compression of one of the nerves that controls sensation and movement in the hands (median nerve). The carpal tunnel is a narrow passage in your wrist made up of small bones and a tough band of tissue that acts as a pulley for the tendons that bend the fingers. It isn't known why the median nerve becomes compressed in most cases, although certain things are thought to increase the risk of CTS developing, such as: a family history of CTS pregnancy \u2013 up to about 50% of pregnant women develop CTS injuries to the wrist other health conditions, such as diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis strenuous, repetitive work with the hand Read more about the causes of carpal tunnel syndrome. Treating carpal tunnel syndrome In some cases CTS will disappear without treatment, or simple self-care measures will reduce the symptoms. CTS in pregnant women often gets better within three months of the baby being born, although it may need treatment. In some women, symptoms can continue for more than a year. Non-surgical treatments, such as wrist splints and corticosteroid injections, are used to treat mild or moderate symptoms. Surgery may be required if non-surgical treatments fails to relieve the symptoms. It may also be used if there is a risk of permanent nerve damage. Read more about treating carpal tunnel syndrome. Surgery relieves the symptoms of mild CTS immediately. But in those with severe nerve damage, it can take a while to recover or there may not be any improvement. Depending on which hand was operated on and what your job involves, you will usually be able to return to work within a few weeks of surgery. Carpal tunnel syndrome animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a condition that causes pain, numbness and a burning or tingling sensation in the hand and fingers. Watch this animation and find out what the carpal tunnel is and what causes CTS. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Who is affected? CTS is more common in women than men.  In the UK, about three in 100 men and five in 100 women experience CTS is their lifetime. Although CTS becomes more common with age, it can affect people of all ages.  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 18\/09\/2014 Next review due: 18\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1460 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 772  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 388  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 163  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Corticosteroids Pins and needles Prevent RSI External links Arthritis Research UK: carpal tunnel syndrome Carpal-Tunnel.net (NHS website) NINDS: carpal tunnel facts Boost your health at work Improve your health at work, with tips on dealing with stress, RSI, back pain, exercise, and healthy eating Find and choose services for Carpal tunnel syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cartilage damage","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cartilage-damage","content":"Cartilage damage - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cartilage damage  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cartilage-damage Clinical trials Cartilage damage Cartilage-damage Treatment   Cartilage damage is a relatively common type of injury. It often involves the knees, although joints such as the hips, ankles and elbows can also be affected. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue found throughout the body. It covers the surface of joints, acting as a shock absorber and allowing bones to slide over one another. It can become damaged as a result of a sudden injury, such as a sports injury, or gradual wear and tear (osteoarthritis). Minor cartilage injuries may get better on their own within a few weeks, but more severe cartilage damage may eventually require surgery. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Treatments Symptoms of cartilage damage Symptoms of cartilage damage in a joint include: joint pain \u2013 this may continue even when resting and worsen when you put weight on the joint swelling \u2013 this may not develop for a few hours or days stiffness a clicking or grinding sensation the joint locking, catching or giving way It can sometimes be difficult to tell a cartilage injury apart from other common joint injuries, such as sprains, as the symptoms are similar. When to get medical advice If you've injured your joint, it's a good idea to try self-care measures first. Sprains and minor cartilage damage may get better on their own within a few days or weeks. More severe cartilage damage probably won't improve on its own and if left untreated, can eventually wear down the joint. Visit your GP or a minor injuries unit (MIU) if: you can't move the joint properly you can't control the pain with ordinary painkillers you can't put any weight on the injured limb or it gives way when you try to use it the injured area looks crooked or has unusual lumps or bumps (other than swelling) you have numbness, discolouration or coldness in any part of the injured area your symptoms haven't started to improve within a few days of self-treatment Your GP may need to refer you for tests such as an X-ray, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan or arthroscopy (a type of keyhole surgery used to look inside joints) to find out if your cartilage is damaged. Treatments for cartilage damage Self-care measures are usually recommended as the first treatment for minor joint injuries. For the first few days: protect the affected area from further injury by using a support, such as a knee brace rest the affected joint elevate the affected limb and apply an ice pack to the joint regularly take ordinary painkillers, such as paracetamol or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Get medical advice if your symptoms are severe or don't improve after a few days. You may need professional treatment such as physiotherapy, or possibly surgery. A number of surgical techniques can be used, including: encouraging the growth of new cartilage by drilling small holes in the nearby bone replacing the damaged cartilage with healthy cartilage taken from another part of the joint replacing the entire joint with an artificial one, such as a knee replacement or hip replacement \u2013 this is usually only necessary in the most severe cases Read more about how cartilage damage is treated. Page last reviewed: 27\/06\/2016 Next review due: 27\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 589 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 296  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 139  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthroscopy Osteoarthritis Sports injuries Orthopaedics External links NICE: autologous chondrocyte implantation NICE: mosaicplasty for knee cartilage defects Knee pain and other running injuries The five most common running injuries, what to do if you get one, plus how to prevent injury Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cat bites","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Bites-human-and-animal","content":"Animal and human bites - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Animal and human bites  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Animal and human bites   Serious animal and human bites can get infected if they're not checked and treated quickly. Always seek medical advice if you've been bitten by an animal or person and the bite has broken the skin. People and animals have a lot of bacteria in their mouths, which can cause an infection if a bite breaks the skin. These infections are rarely serious if treated quickly, but occasionally they can spread to the blood or other parts of the body. Serious infections such as tetanus and rabies are extremely rare in the UK, but it's important to get serious bites looked at as treatment to prevent these infections may be recommended. The following information is about bites by people and animals such as dogs and cats. There are separate pages on insect bites and snake bites. This page covers: What to do if you've been bitten When to get medical advice Signs that a bite may be infected Common causes of bites How to avoid animal bites What to do if you've been bitten If you've been bitten by an animal or another person: clean the wound immediately by running warm tap water over it for a couple of minutes \u2013 it's a good idea to do this even if the skin doesn't appear to be broken remove any objects from the bite, such as teeth, hair or dirt encourage the wound to bleed slightly by gently squeezing it, unless it's already bleeding freely if the wound is bleeding heavily, put a clean pad or sterile dressing over it and apply pressure dry the wound and cover it with a clean dressing or plaster take painkillers if you're in pain, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen \u2013 children under 16 years old shouldn't take aspirin seek medical advice, unless the wound is very minor If the bite has severed a body part like a finger or ear, wash it with tap water, wrap it in clean tissue, and store it in a plastic bag surrounded by ice so it can be transported to hospital. It may be possible to surgically reattach the body part later on. When to seek medical advice If the bite has broken the skin, you should seek immediate medical attention after cleaning the wound. Don't delay seeking help until symptoms of infection appear. Minor bites can be treated at your GP surgery, or by staff at your local walk-in centre or minor injuries unit. For particularly severe bites, visit your local accident and emergency (A&E) department. The healthcare professional treating you may: clean the wound and remove any damaged tissue prescribe a course of antibiotics to prevent infection recommend specific treatment to prevent infections such as tetanus if you're felt to be at risk close the wound with stitches if the risk of infection is thought to be low \u2013 high-risk wounds will usually be left open as this means they're easier to keep clean arrange blood tests to check for infection, or an X-ray to check for any damage to your bones and see if there's anything embedded in your wound, such as a tooth refer you for an assessment by a specialist if the bite penetrated a joint, or there's severe damage, such as damage to bones or nerves \u2013 surgery may be needed in these cases if you're bitten by a person with hepatitis or HIV, there's a tiny chance of the infection spreading if the bite is contaminated with blood, so you may be offered treatment to stop you becoming infected When you return home, watch out for signs of a possible infection. Signs a bite may be infected Symptoms that suggest a wound has become infected include: redness and swelling around the wound the wound feels warm and increasingly painful liquid or pus leaks from the wound a fever of 38C (100.4F) or above sweats and chills swollen glands under the chin or in the neck, armpits or groin red streaks extending along the skin from the wound Get medical help as soon as possible if you think your wound is infected. When do bites happen? Although you may be more worried about bites from wild and stray animals, any animal has the potential to bite. Many bites are actually caused by a person's own pet or an animal belonging to a friend or neighbour. Animals can act unpredictably and bites aren't always provoked. However, an animal is more likely to bite if it's been disturbed, feels threatened, or gets overexcited. Most human bites occur when one person punches another person in the mouth. They can also happen during contact sports, vigorous sex, domestic violence or sexual assault, and fits (seizures). How to avoid animal bites Most animal bites are caused by dogs. The advice below may help reduce the chances of being bitten: never leave a young child unsupervised with a dog \u2013 regardless of what type of dog it is and its previous behaviour treat dogs with respect \u2013 don't approach them suddenly, run around screaming in their presence, or interrupt them when they're eating or sleeping avoid stroking or petting unfamiliar dogs \u2013 when greeting a dog for the first time, let it sniff you before petting it It's also a good idea to avoid contact with any wild or stray animals, particularly while travelling abroad, as they can be aggressive and there's a chance they could carry serious infections, such as rabies. Page last reviewed: 08\/02\/2016 Next review due: 08\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 206 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cuts and grazes First aid Rabies Tetanus External links Animal Behaviour and Training Council The Blue Dog Dogs Trust: be dog smart First aid What to do if someone is injured in an accident Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against Find a minor injuries unit near you Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cataracts","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cataracts-age-related","content":"Age-related cataracts - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Age-related cataracts  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cataracts-age-related Clinical trials Age-related cataracts Introduction  Cataracts occur when changes in the lens of the eye cause it to become less transparent (clear). This results in cloudy or misty vision. The lens is the crystalline structure that sits just behind your pupil (the black circle in the centre of your eye). When light enters your eye, it passes through the cornea (the transparent layer of tissue at the front of the eye) and the lens, which focuses it on the light-sensitive layer of cells at the back of your eye (the retina). Cataracts sometimes start to develop in a person's lens as they get older, stopping some of the light from reaching the back of the eye. Over time, cataracts become worse and start to affect vision. Eventually, surgery will be needed to remove and replace the affected lens. Symptoms of cataracts As cataracts develop over many years, problems may be unnoticeable at first. Cataracts often develop in both eyes, although each eye may be affected differently. You'll usually have blurred, cloudy or misty vision, or you may have small spots or patches where your vision is less clear. Cataracts may also affect your sight in the following ways: you may find it more difficult to see in dim or very bright light the glare from bright lights may be dazzling or uncomfortable to look at colours may look faded or less clear everything may have a yellow or brown tinge you may have double vision you may see a halo (a circle of light) around bright lights, such as car headlights or street lights if you wear glasses, you may find that they become less effective over time Cataracts aren't painful and don't irritate your eyes or make them red. When to see an optician If you have problems with your vision, make an appointment to see your optician (also known as an optometrist). They can examine your eyes and test your sight. The optician may look at your eyes with a slit lamp or ophthalmoscope. These instruments magnify your eye and have a bright light at one end that allows the optician to look inside and check for cataracts. If your optician thinks you have cataracts, they may refer you to an ophthalmologist or an ophthalmic surgeon, who can confirm the diagnosis and plan your treatment. These doctors specialise in eye conditions, such as cataracts, and their treatment. Who's affected Cataracts are very common and they're the main cause of impaired vision worldwide. In the UK, most people who are aged 65 or older have some degree of visual impairment caused by cataracts. Men and women are equally affected. Even though cataracts tend to affect older people (known as age-related cataracts), they can also sometimes affect babies and young children (known as childhood cataracts). What causes age-related cataracts? The reasons why age-related cataracts develop aren't fully understood. Like grey hair, cataracts are an inevitable part of ageing that affect different people at different ages. Cataracts are the result of changes in the structure of the lens over time. It's thought that the cloudy areas in the lens may be caused by changes in the proteins that make up the lens. However, it's not clear how or why getting older cause these changes to occur. As well as your age, there are a number of other factors that may increase your risk of developing cataracts. These include: having a family history of cataracts having diabetes having other eye conditions, such as long-term uveitis eye surgery or an eye injury taking a high dose of corticosteroid medication, or taking corticosteroids for a prolonged period of time Other factors that may possibly be linked to the development of cataracts include: smoking  regularly drinking excessive amounts of alcohol a poor diet lacking in vitamins lifelong exposure to sunlight As the exact cause of age-related cataracts isn't clear, there's no known way to prevent them. Treating age-related cataracts If your cataracts aren't too bad, stronger glasses and brighter reading lights may help. However, as cataracts get worse over time, it's likely that you'll eventually need treatment. Surgery is the only type of treatment that's proven to be effective for cataracts. It's usually recommended if loss of vision has a significant effect on your daily activities, such as driving or reading. Cataract surgery involves removing the cloudy lens through a small incision in your eye and replacing it with a clear, plastic one. In most cases, the procedure is carried out under local anaesthetic (where you're conscious, but the eye is numbed) and you can usually go home the same day. Almost everyone who has cataract surgery experiences an improvement in their vision, although it can sometimes take a few days or weeks for your vision to settle. You should be able to return to most of your normal activities within about two weeks. After the operation, your plastic lens will be set up for a certain level of vision, so you may need to wear glasses to see objects that are either far away or close by. If you wore glasses previously, your prescription will probably change. However, your optician will need to wait until your vision has settled before they can give you a new prescription. Read more about recovering from cataract surgery. Driving with an eye condition If you have cataracts, it could affect your ability to drive. It's your legal obligation to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) about a medical condition that could impact your driving. You can read more about driving with a health condition on the GOV.UK website. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 25\/01\/2016 Next review due: 25\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 951 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 499  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 259  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 107  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Anatomy of the eye JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Cataract surgery Childhood cataracts Find an optician Living with low vision NHS eyecare services External links Cataracts Decision Aid Look after your eyes: cataracts NICE guidance: accommodating lenses NICE guidance: multifocal lenses RNIB: cataracts Look after your eyes Why regular eye tests are important and how a healthy lifestyle can help you maintain good vision Cataract surgery Cataract surgery is the most common operation in the UK. Find out when it's needed and how it's performed NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cataract surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cataract-surgery","content":"Cataract surgery - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cataract surgery  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cataract-surgery Real stories Cataract-surgery Clinical trials Cataract surgery Cataract-surgery When it's offered Cataract-surgery How it's performed Cataract-surgery Recovery Cataract-surgery Risks Introduction  Cataract surgery is a procedure used to treat cataracts, where changes in the lens of the eye cause cloudy, blurry, or misty vision. It's the most common operation performed in the UK, with more than 300,000 procedures carried out each year. Cataracts Cataracts occur when changes in the lens of the eye cause it to become less transparent. The lens is the crystalline structure that sits just behind your pupil, which is the black circle in the centre of your eye. When light enters your eye, it passes through the transparent layer of tissue at the front of the eye (the cornea) and the lens, which focuses it on the light-sensitive layer of cells at the back of your eye (the retina). Cataracts sometimes start to develop in a person's lens as they get older (age-related cataracts), stopping some of the light reaching the retina. This can affect your vision, making it become increasingly cloudy, blurry, or misty. Although cataracts are often associated with age, in rare cases babies are born with cataracts or young children can develop them (childhood cataracts). This topic focuses on surgery for adults with cataracts. When is cataract surgery recommended? Slight cloudiness of the lens is a normal part of ageing. Significant cloudiness, or cataracts, usually get slowly worse over time. Surgery to remove them is the only way to restore vision. However, surgery isn't necessary if your vision isn't significantly affected and you don't have difficulties carrying out everyday tasks. Cataract surgery is available on the NHS if you're having difficulty with activities such as reading, driving, or looking after someone in your care. Read more about when cataract surgery is carried out. The operation Cataract surgery is a relatively straightforward procedure that usually takes 30 to 45 minutes. It's often carried out as day surgery under local anaesthetic, which means you'll be awake during the procedure and can go home on the same day. During the operation, the surgeon will make a tiny cut (incision) in your eye so they can remove the affected lens. After it's been removed, a small plastic lens called an intraocular implant or intraocular lens will be inserted. If you have cataracts in both eyes, you'll have two separate operations carried out a few weeks apart. This gives the first eye time to heal and time for your vision to return. Read more about how cataract surgery is performed. Getting back to normal You'll normally be able to go home a few hours after having cataract surgery, but you'll need to arrange for someone to collect you and take you home. Take it easy for the first two or three days after the operation and make sure you use any eye drops you're given while in hospital. You can continue doing most of your normal activities after cataract surgery, although you'll need to avoid touching your eye or getting anything in it, such as soap and water, for a few weeks. Read more about recovering from cataract surgery. Results of cataract surgery Most people's sight will improve soon after having cataract surgery, although your vision may be blurred for a few days. Eventually, you should be able to: see things in focus, although glasses are often needed look towards lights without as much glare tell the difference between colours, which will seem brighter Most people need to wear glasses for near or distance vision \u2013 or both \u2013 after cataract surgery. This is because artificial lens implants can't focus on a range of different distances. The surgeon will normally aim for more focused distance vision, with dependence on reading glasses for close up work, although this depends on the strength of your glasses and individual circumstances. With glasses, most people have a good enough level of vision to be able to drive and carry out everyday activities without any problems. Your vision may not be restored to normal if you also have another eye condition or in the rare event of a serious complication. What are the risks and complications? The risk of serious complications developing as a result of cataract surgery is small. The most common complication is a condition called posterior capsule opacification (PCO), which can cause your vision to become cloudy again. In PCO, a skin or membrane grows over the back of the lens implant months or years later. If necessary, PCO can be treated with a simple laser eye surgery procedure to cut away the membrane. Other risks or complications of cataract surgery are much rarer and can include: tearing of the lens capsule, the \"pocket\" that holds the lens in place all or some of the cataract dropping into the back of the eye inability to remove all of the cataract or insert a lens implant infection or bleeding in the eye Most complications that can potentially develop after cataract surgery can be treated with medication or further surgery, and don't usually have a long-term impact on your vision. However, there's a very small risk \u2013 around 1 in 1,000 \u2013 of permanent sight loss in the treated eye as a direct result of the operation. Read more about the risks of cataract surgery. Page last reviewed: 21\/02\/2016 Next review due: 21\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1368 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 705  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 373  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 173  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cataracts: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail what cataracts are and how they affect the eye. It also describes what happens during a cataract surgery, a procedure to remove the cataract. Media last reviewed: 07\/05\/2015 Next review due: 07\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Age-related cataracts Childhood cataracts Visual impairment Find an optician Find visual impairment support External links Cataracts Decision Aid The College of Optometrists Eyecare Trust RNIB: cataracts The Royal College of Ophthalmologists Look after your eyes Age-related cataracts Find out why cataracts often occur in older people and how they can be treated NHS eyecare services Everything you need to know about opticians, sight tests and optical charges Find and choose services for Cataract surgery Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cataracts, childhood","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cataracts-childhood","content":"Childhood cataracts - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Childhood cataracts  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cataracts-childhood Clinical trials Childhood cataracts Cataracts-childhood Symptoms Cataracts-childhood Causes Cataracts-childhood Diagnosis Cataracts-childhood Treatment Cataracts-childhood Complications Introduction  Cataracts occur when changes in the lens of the eye cause it to become less transparent (clear). This results in cloudy or misty vision. The lens is the transparent structure located just behind the pupil (the black circle in the centre of the eye). It allows light to pass through to the light-sensitive layer of tissue at the back of the eye (retina). Cataracts most commonly affect older adults (age-related cataracts), but some babies are born with cataracts and children can also develop them at a young age. These are known as childhood cataracts. Childhood cataracts are often referred to as: congenital cataracts \u2013 cataracts present when a baby is born or shortly afterwards developmental, infantile or juvenile cataracts \u2013 cataracts diagnosed in older babies or children Cataracts in babies and children are rare. It's estimated they affect between three and four in every 10,000 children in the UK. Symptoms of cataracts in children In children, cataracts can affect one or both eyes. Cloudy patches in the lens can sometimes get bigger and more can develop, resulting in the child's vision becoming increasingly affected. As well as poor vision, cataracts can also cause \"wobbling eyes\" and a squint (where the eyes point in different directions).  When your child is very young, it can be difficult to spot signs of cataracts. However, your baby's eyes will be routinely examined within 72 hours of birth and again when they're six to eight weeks old. Sometimes, cataracts can develop in children after these screening tests. It's particularly important to spot cataracts in children quickly because early treatment can reduce the risk of long-term vision problems. Therefore, you should visit your GP or tell your health visitor if you have any concerns about your child's eyesight. Read more about the symptoms of childhood cataracts and diagnosing childhood cataracts. What causes cataracts in children? There are a number of reasons why a child may be born with cataracts or develop them while they're still young. However, in many cases it isn't possible to determine the exact cause. Possible causes include: a genetic fault inherited from the child's parents that caused the lens to develop abnormally certain genetic conditions, including Down's syndrome certain infections picked up by the mother during pregnancy, including rubella and chickenpox an injury to the eye after birth Read more about the causes of childhood cataracts. How childhood cataracts are treated Cataracts in children are often not too bad and have little or no effect on their vision. However, if cataracts are affecting your child's vision, they can slow down or stop their normal sight development. In these cases, surgery to remove the affected lens (or lenses) will usually be recommended as soon as possible. Replacing the focusing power of the lens is as important as the surgery to remove it. The affected lens may sometimes be replaced with an artificial lens during surgery, although it's more common for the child to wear contact lenses or glasses after surgery to compensate for the lens that was removed. It can be difficult to predict exactly how much better your child's vision will be after treatment, although it's likely there will always be a degree of reduced vision in the affected eye (or eyes). However, many children with childhood cataracts are able to live a full and normal life. Read more about treating childhood cataracts. What are the risks? Cataracts that affect vision that aren't quickly treated can sometimes cause irreversible damage to eyesight, including a permanently lazy eye and even blindness in severe cases. Cataract surgery is generally successful, with a low risk of serious complications. The most common risk associated with cataract surgery is a condition that can affect artificial lens implants called posterior capsule opacification (PCO), which causes cloudy vision to return. Another important risk of surgery is glaucoma, where pressure builds inside the eye. Without successful treatment, glaucoma can cause irreversible damage to key structures in the eye. Although some of the possible complications of cataract surgery can affect your child's vision, they can often be treated with medication or further surgery. Read more about the complications of childhood cataracts. Can cataracts in children be prevented? It's not usually possible to prevent cataracts, particularly those that are inherited (run in the family). However, following the advice of your midwife or GP to avoid infections during pregnancy (including making sure all your vaccinations are up to date before getting pregnant) may reduce the chances of your child being born with cataracts. If you have previously had a baby with childhood cataracts and are planning another pregnancy, you may wish to speak with your GP about whether genetic counselling would be appropriate. Genetic counselling can help couples who may be at risk of passing an inherited condition on to their child. Read more about infections in pregnancy and genetic testing and counselling. Information about your child If your child has had cataracts, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 11\/01\/2016 Next review due: 11\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 41 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Sight tests for children Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out when children need eye tests, what the test involves and why it's important. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Age-related cataracts Cataract surgery Children's eyes Eye tests for children Find an optician Find visual impairment support External links RNIB: cataracts The Eyecare Trust Blind Children UK Baby health and development reviews Find out when your baby will have their health and development reviews, and what happens at each one Eyecare services FAQ Find out what health professionals you will meet at your local optician, how to complain if things go wrong and other useful tips about NHS eye services NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Catarrh","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Catarrh","content":"Catarrh - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Catarrh  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Catarrh Introduction  Catarrh is a build-up of mucus in an airway or cavity of the body. It usually affects the back of the nose, the throat or the sinuses (air-filled cavities in the bones of the face). It's often temporary, but some people experience it for months or years. This is known as chronic catarrh. Catarrh can be a nuisance and may be difficult to get rid of, but it's not harmful and there are treatments available. This page covers: Symptoms associated with catarrh Treatments for catarrh When to see your GP What causes catarrh? Symptoms associated with catarrh Catarrh can lead to a: constant need to clear your throat feeling that your throat is blocked blocked or stuffy nose that you can't clear runny nose feeling of mucus running down the back of your throat persistent cough headache or facial pain reduced sense of smell and taste crackling sensation in your ear and some temporary hearing loss These problems can be frustrating to live with and may affect your sleep, making you feel tired. Treatments for catarrh Catarrh will often pass in a few days or weeks as the condition that causes it improves. See What causes catarrh? below for more information. There are things you can try at home to relieve your symptoms, such as: avoiding things that trigger your symptoms, such as allergens or smoky places taking sips of cold water when you feel the need to clear your throat \u2013 constantly clearing your throat may make things worse using a saline nasal rinse several times a day \u2013 these can be bought from a pharmacy or made at home with half a teaspoon of salt in a pint of boiled water that's been left to cool avoiding warm, dry atmospheres, such as places with air conditioning and car heating systems \u2013 placing plants or bowls of water in a room may help to keep the air humid staying well hydrated talking to a pharmacist about suitable over-the-counter medications \u2013 including decongestants, antihistamines or steroid nasal sprays There are also several remedies, such as herbal medicines, available from health shops and pharmacies that claim to treat catarrh. Some people find these helpful, but there's generally little scientific evidence to suggest they work. When to see your GP Speak to your GP if your catarrh persists and is becoming difficult to live with. They may want to rule out conditions that could be causing it, such as nasal polyps or allergies. This may mean you need to be referred to a specialist for tests. If you're diagnosed with a specific underlying condition, treating it may help relieve your catarrh. For example, nasal polyps may be treated with a steroid nasal spray, or in some cases surgery.  Read more about treating nasal polyps. If a cause for you catarrh cannot be found, the self-help techniques above may be recommended. Unfortunately, however, chronic catarrh can be hard to treat and may last for a long time. What causes catarrh? Catarrh is usually caused by the immune system reacting to an infection or irritation, which causes the lining of your nose and throat to become swollen and produce mucus. This can be triggered by: a cold or other infections hay fever or other types of allergic rhinitis non-allergic rhinitis nasal polyps It's unclear what causes chronic catarrh, but it's not thought to be the result of an allergy or infection. It may be related to an abnormality in the way mucus travels within the nose or an increased sensitivity to mucus in the back of the nose and throat. Page last reviewed: 17\/02\/2016 Next review due: 17\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 887 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 241  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 233  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 166  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Allergic rhinitis Common cold Decongestants Nasal polyps Non-allergic rhinitis External links Allergy UK ENT UK: patient information Colds and flu The difference between a cold and flu, remedies and who needs to have the flu jab Hay fever All you need to know about hay fever and its treatment, plus lots of self-help tips Find and choose services for Catarrh Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Catheter","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Urinary-catheterization","content":"Urinary catheterisation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urinary catheterisation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Urinary-catheterization Clinical trials Urinary catheterisation Urinary-catheterization Types Urinary-catheterization Living with Urinary-catheterization Risks Introduction  Urinary catheterisation is a procedure used to drain the bladder and collect urine, through a flexible tube called a catheter. Urinary catheters are usually inserted by doctors or nurses in hospital or the community. They can either be inserted through the tube that carries urine out of the bladder (urethral catheter) or through a small opening made in your lower tummy (suprapubic catheter). The catheter usually remains in the bladder, allowing urine to flow through it and into a drainage bag. Depending on the type of catheter you have and why it\u2019s being used, the catheter may be removed after a few minutes, hours or days, or it may be needed for the long term. Why urinary catheters are used A urinary catheter is usually used in people who have difficulty passing urine naturally. It can also be used to empty the bladder before or after surgery and to help perform certain tests. Specific reasons include: to allow urine to drain if you have an obstruction in the tube that carries urine out of the bladder (urethra) \u2013 for example, because of scarring or prostate enlargement to allow you to urinate if you have bladder weakness or nerve damage which affects your ability to pee to drain your bladder during childbirth, if you have an epidural anaesthetic to drain your bladder before, during and\/or after some types of surgery, such as operations on the womb, ovaries or bowels to deliver medication directly into the bladder, such as during chemotherapy for bladder cancer as a treatment for urinary incontinence when other types of treatment haven\u2019t worked The catheter will be used until it\u2019s no longer needed. This may be for a short time and will be removed before leaving hospital, or it may be needed for longer or even permanently. Types of urinary catheter There are two main types of urinary catheter: intermittent catheters \u2013 catheters that are temporarily inserted into the bladder and removed once the bladder is empty indwelling catheters \u2013 catheters that remain in place for many days or weeks and are held in position by a water-filled balloon in the bladder Many people prefer to use an indwelling catheter because it's more convenient and avoids the repeated catheter insertions associated with intermittent catheters. However, indwelling catheters are more likely to cause problems such as infections (see below). Inserting either type of catheter can be uncomfortable, so anaesthetic gel is used to reduce any pain. You may also experience some discomfort while the catheter is in place, but most people with a long-term catheter get used to this over time. Read more about the types of urinary catheter. Looking after your catheter If you need a long-term urinary catheter, you will be given detailed advice about looking after it before you leave hospital. This will include advice about getting new catheter supplies, reducing the risk of complications such as infections, spotting signs of potential problems, and when you should seek further medical advice. You should be able to live a relatively normal life with a urinary catheter. The catheter and bag can be concealed under clothes and you should be able to carry out most everyday activities, including working, exercising, swimming and having sex. Read more about living with a urinary catheter. Risks and potential problems The main problem caused by urinary catheters are infections in the urethra, bladder, or less commonly the kidneys. These types of infection are known as urinary tract infections (UTIs) and they usually need to be treated with antibiotics. Catheters can also sometimes lead to other problems, such as bladder spasms (similar to stomach cramps), leakages, blockages and damage to the urethra. Read more about the risks of urinary catheterisation Page last reviewed: 19\/02\/2015 Next review due: 19\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 197 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Urinary incontinence Urinary tract infections External links Bladder and Bowel Foundation The British Association of Urological Surgeons: patient info healthtalk.org: living with a urinary catheter Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Check your bladder A lot can be done to help bladder problems. Take this test to see if you need further advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cavernoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cavernoma","content":"Cavernoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cavernoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cavernoma Community Cavernoma Introduction  A cavernoma is a cluster of abnormal blood vessels, usually found in the brain and spinal cord. They're sometimes known as cavernous angiomas, cavernous hemangiomas, or cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM). A typical cavernoma looks like a raspberry. It's filled with blood that flows slowly through vessels that are like \"caverns\". A cavernoma can vary in size from a few millimetres to several centimetres across. Symptoms of cavernoma A cavernoma often doesn't cause symptoms, but when symptoms do occur they can include: bleeding (haemorrhage) fits (seizures) headaches neurological problems, such as dizziness, slurred speech (dysarthria), double vision, balance problems and tremor weakness, numbness, tiredness, memory problems and difficulty concentrating a type of stroke called a haemorrhagic stroke The severity and duration of symptoms can vary depending on the type of cavernoma and where it's located. Problems can occur if the cavernoma bleeds or presses on certain areas of the brain. The cells lining a cavernoma are often thinner than those that line normal blood vessels, which means they're prone to leaking blood. In most cases, bleeding is small \u2013 usually around half a teaspoonful of blood \u2013 and may not cause other symptoms. But severe haemorrhages can be life threatening and may lead to longlasting problems. You should seek medical help as soon as possible if you experience any of the above symptoms for the first time. What causes a cavernoma? In most cases, there's no clear reason why a person develops a cavernoma. The condition can sometimes run in families \u2013 less than 50% of cases are thought to be genetic. However, in most cases cavernomas occur randomly. Genetic testing can be carried out to determine whether a cavernoma is genetic or whether it's occurred randomly.  Some cavernoma cases have also been linked to radiation exposure, such as previously having radiotherapy to the brain, usually as a child. Who's affected? It's estimated about 1 in every 600 people in the UK has a cavernoma that doesn't cause symptoms.  Every year, around 1 person in every 400,000 in the UK is diagnosed with a cavernoma that has caused symptoms. If symptoms do occur, most people will develop them by the time they reach their 30s. Diagnosing cavernoma Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans are mainly used to diagnose cavernomas. As symptoms aren't always evident, many people are only diagnosed with a cavernoma after having an MRI scan for another reason. A computerised tomography (CT) scan or angiography can also be used to diagnose cavernoma, but they're not as reliable as an MRI scan. Monitoring your symptoms Any symptoms you have may come and go as the cavernoma bleeds and then reabsorbs blood. It's important to closely monitor your symptoms, as any new symptoms might be a sign of a haemorrhage. Your doctor can advise you about what to do if you experience any new or worsening symptoms. They may also recommend having a further brain scan. MRI and CT scans can be used to detect bleeding on the brain, although they can't necessarily identify cavernomas that are at an increased risk of bleeding. This is because the features of a cavernoma that can be seen on a brain scan, such as an increase in size, don't appear to be directly linked to the likelihood of bleeding. Although cavernomas can get bigger, large cavernomas aren't any more likely to bleed than smaller ones. What are the chances of a cavernoma bleeding? The risk of having a haemorrhage varies from person to person, depending on whether you have experienced any bleeding before. If you haven't had any bleeding before, it's estimated you have a less than 1% chance of experiencing a haemorrhage each year. If your cavernoma has bled previously, your risk of having another haemorrhage is somewhere between 4% and 25% each year. However, this risk decreases progressively over time if you don't experience any further bleeds, and eventually returns to the same level as that of people who haven't had any bleeding before. Your level of risk will be one of the main factors taken into consideration when deciding if you would benefit from treatment. Treating cavernoma The recommended treatment for cavernoma will vary depending on an individual's circumstances and factors such as size, location and number. Some cavernoma symptoms, such as headaches and seizures, can be controlled with medication. However, more invasive treatment may sometimes be offered to reduce the risk of future haemorrhages. The decision to have such treatment is made on a case-by-case basis in discussion with your doctor. Types of treatment offered in the UK to reduce the risk of haemorrhages include: neurosurgery \u2013 carried out under general anaesthetic to remove the cavernoma stereotactic radiosurgery \u2013 where a single, concentrated dose of radiation is aimed directly at the cavernoma, causing it to become thickened and scarred In most cases, neurosurgery is preferred to stereotactic radiosurgery because the effectiveness of radiosurgery in preventing haemorrhages is unknown. Stereotactic radiosurgery is usually only considered if the position of the cavernoma makes neurosurgery too difficult or dangerous.  Risks of invasive treatment include stroke and death, although the exact risks depend on the location of the cavernoma. You should discuss the possible risks of treatment with your doctor beforehand. Further information International research programmes are trying to find out more about what causes cavernoma and how these defective blood vessels are formed. The long-term outlook for people with cavernomas is also being investigated. The Cavernoma Alliance UK website has more information about the condition. Page last reviewed: 28\/03\/2016 Next review due: 28\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 196 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 142  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Having an operation Stroke What to do if someone has a seizure External links Cavernoma Alliance UK MRI scan An MRI scan uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to produce detailed images of the inside of the body Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cavernous sinus thrombosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cavernous-sinus-thrombosis","content":"Cavernous sinus thrombosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cavernous sinus thrombosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cavernous-sinus-thrombosis Clinical trials Cavernous sinus thrombosis Cavernous-sinus-thrombosis Symptoms Cavernous-sinus-thrombosis Causes Cavernous-sinus-thrombosis Complications Introduction  Cavernous sinus thrombosis is a blood clot in the cavernous sinuses. It can be life-threatening. The cavernous sinuses are hollow spaces located under the brain, behind each eye socket. A major blood vessel called the jugular vein carries blood through the cavernous sinuses away from the brain. A blood clot can develop when an infection in the face or skull spreads to the cavernous sinuses. The blood clot develops to prevent the infection spreading further, but it can restrict the blood flow from the brain, which can damage the brain, eyes and nerves running between them. Sometimes, clots can develop without infection. Read more about the causes of cavernous sinus thrombosis. Symptoms of cavernous sinus thrombosis include: a sharp and severe headache, particularly around the eye swelling and bulging of the eye(s) and the surrounding tissues eye pain that's often severe double vision Read more about the symptoms of cavernous sinus thrombosis. When to see your GP Contact your GP if you experience a persistent and severe headache you haven't had before, or if you develop eye pain or swelling of one or both eyes. While it's highly unlikely to be the result of cavernous sinus thrombosis, a persistent headache usually needs to be investigated. After an examination, you may be referred for tests, including a computerised tomography (CT) scan, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan and blood tests. Treating cavernous sinus thrombosis Cavernous sinus thrombosis needs treatment in hospital. In most cases, you'll be treated in an intensive care unit, so you can be closely monitored. Antibiotics Antibiotics are the main treatment for cavernous sinus thrombosis. Treatment will be started as soon as possible, even before tests have confirmed if a bacterial infection is responsible. If tests later show that a bacterial infection didn't cause the condition, antibiotic treatment may be stopped. Most people will require at least a three- to four-week course of antibiotics to ensure the infection has been fully cleared from their body. The antibiotics will be given through an intravenous drip directly connected to one of your veins. Around 1 in 10 people will experience side effects when taking antibiotics. These are generally mild and can include diarrhoea, nausea and a skin rash. Anticoagulants In some cases, you may also be given a medication called heparin to help dissolve the clot and prevent further clots. Heparin is an anticoagulant medication, which means it makes the blood less sticky. There are some uncertainties about using anticoagulants to treat cavernous sinus thrombosis, such as when they should be used and for how long. There's also a risk of provoking serious problems, such as excessive bleeding (haemorrhaging). As cavernous sinus thrombosis is so rare, it's difficult to study, which means there's a lack of evidence regarding the use of anticoagulants to treat it. However, the small amount of research that does exist seems to suggest that anticoagulants can be an effective treatment for some people, and most doctors agree it should be used where appropriate. Corticosteroids You may also be given steroid medication (corticosteroids). Corticosteroids can reduce inflammation and swelling in your body. As with anticoagulant therapy, there's little evidence concerning the effectiveness of corticosteroids in treating cavernous sinus thrombosis. Nonetheless, corticosteroids are thought to be beneficial for some people. Surgical drainage If the symptoms of cavernous sinus thrombosis were caused by an infection spreading from a boil or sinusitis, it may be necessary to drain away pus from that site. This can be done either using a needle or during surgery. How long does treatment last? Several weeks of antibiotic treatment are usually necessary to ensure the infection has cleared. However, it can take a long time to recover fully, and it may be several months before you're well enough to leave hospital. Complications of cavernous sinus thrombosis Cavernous sinus thrombosis is a very serious condition. Even with prompt treatment, as many as one in three people with the condition may die. Around 1 in 10 people who survive will develop long-term health problems due to damage to their brain, such as persistent headaches and fits, or some degree of vision loss.  Read more about the complications of cavernous sinus thrombosis.  Who's affected? It's difficult to say exactly how many people are affected by cavernous sinus thrombosis, but it's thought to be very rare. The condition affects people of all ages and tends to be more common in women than men. This may be because pregnancy and taking the oral contraceptive pill can make women more vulnerable to blood clots. Page last reviewed: 13\/05\/2015 Next review due: 13\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 18 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood clot Boils Sinusitis Staphylococcal infections Sinusitis Sinusitis is inflammation of the lining of the sinuses. Find out about the symptoms, causes and treatments Boils A boil is a red, painful, lump on the skin that develops at the site of an infected hair follicle Find and choose services for Cavernous sinus thrombosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CBD","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Corticobasal-degeneration","content":"Corticobasal degeneration - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Corticobasal degeneration  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Corticobasal-degeneration Clinical trials Corticobasal-degeneration Community Corticobasal degeneration Corticobasal-degeneration Symptoms Corticobasal-degeneration Diagnosis Corticobasal-degeneration Treatment Introduction  Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is a rare condition that can cause gradually worsening problems with movement, speech, memory and swallowing. It's often also called corticobasal syndrome (CBS). CBD is caused by increasing numbers of brain cells becoming damaged or dying over time. Most cases of CBD develop in adults aged between 50 and 70. CBD symptoms The symptoms of CBD get gradually worse over time. They are very variable and many people only have a few of them. Symptoms can include: difficulty controlling your limb on one side of the body (a \"useless\" hand) muscle stiffness shaking (tremors), jerky movements and spasms (dystonia) problems with balance and co-ordination slow and slurred speech symptoms of dementia, such as memory and visual problems slow, effortful speech difficulty swallowing One limb is usually affected at first, before spreading over several years to affect other parts of the body. The rate at which the symptoms progress varies widely from person to person. One limb is usually affected at first, before spreading to the rest of the body. The rate at which the symptoms progress varies widely from person to person. Read more about the symptoms of CBD. What causes CBD? CBD occurs when brain cells in certain parts of the brain are damaged as a result of a build-up of a protein called tau. The surface of the brain (cortex) is affected, as well as a deep part of the brain called the basal ganglia. Tau occurs naturally in the brain and is usually broken down before it reaches high levels. In people with CBD, it isn't broken down properly and forms harmful clumps in brain cells. CBD has been linked to changes in certain genes, but these genetic links are weak and the risk to other family members is very low. Diagnosing CBD There's no single test for CBD. Instead, the diagnosis is based on the pattern of your symptoms. Your doctor will try to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms, such as Parkinson's disease or a stroke. You may need to have a brain scan to look for other possible causes of your symptoms, as well as tests of your memory, concentration and ability to understand language. The diagnosis must be made or confirmed by a consultant with expertise in CBD. This will usually be a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves). Read more about how CBD is diagnosed. Treatments for CBD As someone with CBD can be affected in many different ways, treatment and care is best provided by a team of health and social care professionals working together. Treatments may include: medication \u2013 to improve stiffness and muscle spasms, sleep and mood, pain or memory physiotherapy \u2013 to help with movement and balance difficulties speech and language therapy \u2013 to help with communication and swallowing problems occupational therapy \u2013 to improve the skills and abilities needed for daily activities at home palliative care and advanced care planning Read more about how CBD is treated. Outlook There is currently no treatment that has been shown to stop CBD getting gradually worse, although treatments can reduce many of the symptoms. Good care and assistance can help someone with CBD be more independent and enjoy a better quality of life, but the condition will eventually put them at risk of serious complications. CBD usually changes very slowly. Many people find it helpful to plan ahead with their doctors (GP and specialist) to make decisions about what to do in later stages of the illness. Difficulty swallowing can cause choking, or inhaling food or liquid into the airways. This can lead to pneumonia, which can be life-threatening. As a result of these complications, the average life expectancy for someone with CBD is around six to eight years from when their symptoms start. However, this is only an average and CBD is very variable. Information about you If you have CBD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 19\/10\/2015 Next review due: 19\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 69 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support guide End of life care Living with disability Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) External links PSP Association What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CBT","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cognitive-behavioural-therapy","content":"Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cognitive-behavioural-therapy Real stories Cognitive-behavioural-therapy Clinical trials Cognitive behavioural therapy Cognitive-behavioural-therapy How it works   Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a talking therapy that can help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and behave. It's most commonly used to treat anxiety and depression, but can be useful for other mental and physical health problems. This topic covers: How it works Uses What happens during a session Pros and cons Finding a therapist How CBT works CBT is based on the concept that your thoughts, feelings, physical sensations and actions are interconnected, and that negative thoughts and feelings can trap you in a vicious cycle. CBT aims to help you deal with overwhelming problems in a more positive way by breaking them down into smaller parts. You're shown how to change these negative patterns to improve the way you feel. Unlike some other talking treatments, CBT deals with your current problems, rather than focusing on issues from your past. It looks for practical ways to improve your state of mind on a daily basis. Read more about how CBT works. Uses for CBT CBT has been shown to be an effective way of treating a number of different mental health conditions. In addition to depression or anxiety disorders, CBT can also help people with: obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)  panic disorder post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) phobias eating disorders \u2013 such as anorexia and bulimia sleep problems \u2013 such as insomnia problems related to alcohol misuse CBT is also sometimes used to treat people with long-term health conditions, such as: irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) Although CBT can't cure the physical symptoms of these conditions, it can help people cope better with their symptoms. What happens during CBT sessions If CBT is recommended, you'll usually have a session with a therapist once a week or once every two weeks. The course of treatment usually lasts for between five and 20 sessions, with each session lasting 30-60 minutes. During the sessions, you'll work with your therapist to break down your problems into their separate parts \u2013 such as your thoughts, physical feelings and actions. You and your therapist will analyse these areas to work out if they're unrealistic or unhelpful and to determine the effect they have on each other and on you. Your therapist will then be able to help you work out how to change unhelpful thoughts and behaviours. After working out what you can change, your therapist will ask you to practise these changes in your daily life and you'll discuss how you got on during the next session. The eventual aim of therapy is to teach you to apply the skills you've learnt during treatment to your daily life. This should help you manage your problems and stop them having a negative impact on your life \u2013 even after your course of treatment finishes. Pros and cons of CBT Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) can be as effective as medication in treating some mental health problems, but it may not be successful or suitable for everyone. Some of the advantages of CBT include: it may be helpful in cases where medication alone hasn't worked it can be completed in a relatively short period of time compared to other talking therapies the highly structured nature of CBT means it can be provided in different formats, including in groups, self-help books and computer programs it teaches you useful and practical strategies that can be used in everyday life \u2013 even after the treatment has finished Some of the disadvantages of CBT to consider include: you need to commit yourself to the process to get the most from it \u2013 a therapist can help and advise you, but they need your co-operation attending regular CBT sessions and carrying out any extra work between sessions can take up a lot of your time it may not be suitable for people with more complex mental health needs or learning difficulties \u2013 as it requires structured sessions it involves confronting your emotions and anxieties \u2013 you may experience initial periods where you're anxious or emotionally uncomfortable it focuses on the individual\u2019s capacity to change themselves (their thoughts, feelings and behaviours) \u2013 which doesn't address any wider problems in systems or families that often have a significant impact on an individual\u2019s health and wellbeing Some critics also argue that because CBT only addresses current problems and focuses on specific issues, it doesn't address the possible underlying causes of mental health conditions, such as an unhappy childhood. Finding a CBT therapist If you think you have a problem that may benefit from treatment with CBT, the first step is usually to speak to your GP.  Your GP may be able to refer you for CBT that's free on the NHS, although you may have to wait.  Find psychological therapy services. If you can afford it, you can choose to pay for your therapy privately. The cost of private therapy sessions varies, but it's usually £40-100 per session. If you're considering having CBT privately, ask your GP if they can suggest a local therapist. The British Association for Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies (BABCP) keeps a register of all accredited therapists in the UK and The British Psychological Society (BPS) has a directory of chartered psychologists, some of whom specialise in CBT. Page last reviewed: 15\/07\/2016 Next review due: 15\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1199 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 461  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 328  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 250  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Stress, anxiety and depression Generalised anxiety disorder Clinical depression OCD Panic disorder Phobias Counselling Psychotherapy External links Mental Health Foundation: talking therapies Rethink Mental Illness Mind BABCP: CBT Royal College of Psychiatrists: CBT British Psychological Society Mental health services Find out what mental health services exist and how to access them Benefits of talking therapy Find out about counselling and talking therapies, and how they can help Can I get free therapy or counselling? Find out whether you can get counselling free on the NHS, and how to access it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CEA test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/CEA-test","content":"Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview CEA test Introduction  A carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test is used to check how well treatment is working in certain types of cancer, particularly colon cancer. Carcinoembryonic antigens are harmful substances (usually proteins) that are produced by some types of cancer. In response to the antigens, the body produces antibodies to help fight them. A CEA test is often carried out after surgery to check carcinoembryonic antigen levels. As well as being a useful marker in cases of colon cancer, CEA tests can also be used to assess other types of cancer including: rectal cancer lung cancer breast cancer liver cancer pancreatic cancer stomach cancer ovarian cancer Read more about the CEA test at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 01\/10\/2015 Next review due: 01\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 29 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Cancer External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cellulitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cellulitis","content":"Cellulitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cellulitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cellulitis Clinical trials Cellulitis Cellulitis Symptoms Cellulitis Causes Cellulitis Treatment   Cellulitis is an infection of the deeper layers of skin and the underlying tissue. It can be serious if not treated promptly. The infection develops suddenly and can spread through the body quickly. Severe infections can spread deep into the body, and can be life threatening. Most cases are successfully treated with antibiotics at home, although sometimes it needs to be treated in hospital. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Treatments Outlook Causes Prevention Symptoms of cellulitis Cellulitis causes an area of skin to suddenly become: red hot swollen painful tender It most often affects the lower legs, but can occur anywhere. In more severe cases, cellulitis can also be accompanied \u2013 and often preceded \u2013 by: a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above vigorous shaking (rigors) nausea and vomiting dizziness confusion These are signs that the infection has spread deeper into the body. Read more about the symptoms of cellulitis. When to get medical advice See your GP or visit your nearest minor injuries unit as soon as possible if an area of your skin suddenly turns red, painful and hot. Early treatment can help reduce the risk of the infection becoming severe. Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department immediately if: your face or the area around your eye is affected your symptoms are getting rapidly worse you experience other symptoms in addition to the changes in your skin, such as a fever or vomiting you have a weak immune system \u2013 for example, because of HIV or chemotherapy \u2013 or severe lymphoedema, a condition that causes swelling in the body's tissues a young child or elderly person has possible cellulitis Treatments for cellulitis Cellulitis is usually treated with antibiotics. Many infections can be treated with antibiotic tablets at home. You'll usually be given a seven-day course of tablets, and your symptoms should start to improve after a few days. Make sure you complete the whole course of medicine you've been given, even if you're feeling better. Contact your GP if your symptoms get worse after a few days or don't improve within a week. For serious infections, treatment is usually started in hospital. You'll normally be given antibiotics directly into a vein through an injection or a drip. Many hospitals can then arrange for this treatment to continue at home or in an outpatient clinic. Treatment is usually for seven days. If the infection responds to treatment quickly, it may be possible to complete the course with antibiotic tablets instead of having injections or a drip. Read more about how cellulitis is treated. Outlook for cellulitis Cellulitis can usually be treated successfully with antibiotics, and most people make a full recovery. But there is a risk it could cause potentially serious problems, particularly if it's not treated quickly, such as: blood poisoning (septicaemia) \u2013 where the bacteria enter the blood kidney damage leg ulcers Septicaemia and kidney problems can be life threatening and require immediate treatment in hospital. Causes of cellulitis Cellulitis is usually caused by a bacterial infection. The bacteria that cause it often live harmlessly on the skin, but they can lead to an infection if they get into a break in your skin, such as: a bruise, cut or graze  an animal bite or insect bite a leg ulcer dry, cracked skin \u2013 for example, because of eczema or athlete's foot In most cases the trigger for the infection is unknown. The infection isn't normally spread from person to person. Read about the causes of cellulitis, including information on who's most at risk of the condition. Preventing cellulitis If you've had cellulitis before, you're more likely to get it again. It's not always possible to prevent it, but the following measures may help reduce your risk: use moisturiser if your skin is dry or prone to cracking lose weight if you're overweight \u2013 being obese can increase your risk of cellulitis try to ensure any conditions that can increase your risk of cellulitis \u2013 such as eczema, athlete's foot, leg ulcers and lymphoedema \u2013 are well managed make sure any cuts, grazes or bites are kept clean \u2013 wash them under running tap water and cover them with a plaster or dressing wash your hands regularly \u2013 particularly when treating or touching a wound or skin condition If you get cellulitis often or severely, your GP may refer you to a skin specialist called a dermatologist, or an infection specialist, to discuss the option of taking antibiotics on a long-term basis to protect against further infections. Cellulitis and cellulite Cellulite is a cosmetic problem caused by fatty deposits that form underneath the skin. It is not related to cellulitis. If you're overweight, losing weight is the best way of dealing with cellulite. Read more information and advice about losing weight. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/08\/2016 Next review due: 09\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1801 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 961  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 488  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 82  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 212  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood poisoning Lymphoedema Necrotising fasciitis Skin care External links British Association of Dermatologists: cellulitis and erysipelas (PDF, 171kb) Lymphoedema Support Network: cellulitis Look after your skin Benefit your skin by stopping smoking, plus how to protect your skin against sun damage and more Find and choose services for Cellulitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cerebellar ataxia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ataxia","content":"Ataxia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ataxia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ataxia Clinical trials Ataxia Community Ataxia Ataxia Types Ataxia Causes Ataxia Diagnosis Ataxia Treatment Introduction  Ataxia is a term for a group of disorders that affect co-ordination, balance and speech. Any part of the body can be affected, but people with ataxia often have difficulties with: balance and walking speaking swallowing tasks that require a high degree of control, such as writing and eating vision  The exact symptoms and their severity vary depending on the type of ataxia a person has. Types of ataxia There are many different types of ataxia, which can be divided into three broad categories: acquired ataxia \u2013 where symptoms develop as the result of trauma, a stroke, multiple sclerosis (MS), a brain tumour, nutritional deficiencies, or other problems that damage the brain or nervous system hereditary ataxia \u2013 where symptoms develop slowly over many years and are caused by faulty genes that a person inherits from their parents; the most common type is Friedreich's ataxia idiopathic late-onset cerebellar ataxia (ILOCA) \u2013 where the brain is progressively damaged over time for reasons that are unclear Read more about the main types of ataxia. What causes ataxia? Ataxia usually results from damage to a part of the brain called the cerebellum, but it can also be caused by damage to other parts of the nervous system. This damage can be part of an underlying condition such as MS, or can be caused by a head injury, lack of oxygen to the brain, or long-term, excessive alcohol consumption. Hereditary ataxia is caused by a faulty gene passed on by family members, who may or may not be affected. Read more about the causes of ataxia. How ataxia is treated In most cases, there's no cure for ataxia and supportive treatment to control the symptoms is necessary. This may include: speech and language therapy to help with speech and swallowing problems physiotherapy to help with movement problems occupational therapy to help you cope with the day-to-day problems medication to control muscle, bladder, heart and eye problems In a few cases, it's possible to improve ataxia or stop it getting worse by treating the underlying cause. Read more about treating ataxia. Outlook The outlook for ataxia can vary considerably and largely depends on the type of ataxia you have. Some types may remain relatively stable or even improve with time, but most will get progressively worse over many years. Life expectancy is generally shorter than normal for people with hereditary ataxia, although some people can live well into their 50s, 60s or beyond. In more severe cases, the condition can be fatal in childhood or early adulthood. For acquired ataxia, the outlook depends on the underlying cause. Some cases may improve or stay the same, while other cases may get gradually worse over time and reduce life expectancy. Information about you If you have ataxia, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 12\/05\/2015 Next review due: 12\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 192 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with disability Occupational therapy Physiotherapy External links The A-T Society Ataxia UK Disabled Living Foundation HealthUnlocked: Ataxia UK online forum What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cerebral palsy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cerebral-palsy","content":"Cerebral palsy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cerebral palsy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cerebral-palsy Clinical trials Cerebral palsy Cerebral-palsy Symptoms Cerebral-palsy Causes Cerebral-palsy Diagnosis Cerebral-palsy Treatment Cerebral-palsy Complications Introduction  Cerebral palsy is the general term for a number of neurological conditions that affect movement and co-ordination. Neurological conditions are caused by problems in the brain and nervous system. Specifically, cerebral palsy is caused by a problem in the parts of the brain responsible for controlling muscles. The condition can occur if the brain develops abnormally or is damaged before, during or shortly after birth. Causes of cerebral palsy include: an infection caught by the mother during pregnancy a difficult or premature birth bleeding in the baby\u2019s brain changes (mutations) in the genes that affect the brain's development Read more about the causes of cerebral palsy. Symptoms of cerebral palsy The symptoms of cerebral palsy normally become apparent during the first three years of a child's life. The main symptoms are: muscle stiffness or floppiness (hypotonia) muscle weakness random and uncontrolled body movements balance and co-ordination problems These symptoms can affect different areas of the body and vary in severity from person to person. Some people only have minor problems, whereas others are severely disabled. Many people with cerebral palsy also have a number of associated problems, including: repeated fits or seizures drooling problems and swallowing difficulties (dysphagia) Some people with the condition may have communication and learning difficulties, although intelligence is often unaffected. Read more about the symptoms of cerebral palsy. When to seek medical advice A child with cerebral palsy may be slower in achieving important developmental goals, such as learning to crawl, walk or speak. You should see your GP if you're concerned about your child's development. If necessary, they can refer you to a paediatrician (a doctor who specialises in the treatment of children), who can identify any problems. Read more about diagnosing cerebral palsy. How cerebral palsy is treated There's no cure for cerebral palsy. However, there are numerous treatments available, which can treat many of its symptoms and help people with the condition to be as independent as possible. These treatments include:  physiotherapy occupational therapy medication to relieve muscle stiffness and spasms In some cases, surgery may also be needed. Read more about treating cerebral palsy. Outlook Cerebral palsy isn't a progressive condition. This means the original problem in the brain doesn't get worse with age, and life expectancy is usually unaffected. However, the physical and emotional strain of living with a long-term condition such as cerebral palsy can put a great deal of stress on the body, which can cause further problems in later life. Read more about the complications of cerebral palsy. Information about your child If your child has cerebral palsy, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 15\/03\/2016 Next review due: 15\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 470 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 157  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 154  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cerebral palsy Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. About one in 400 children born alive has cerebral palsy. An expert explains the causes, symptoms and treatment Media last reviewed: 22\/04\/2015 Next review due: 22\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Guide to caring Caring for a disabled child Dysphagia Epilepsy Urinary incontinence Hypotonia Scoliosis External links Scope HemiHelp Action Medical Research Brain & Spine Foundation Special needs in children If your child has a health condition or disability, they may need specialised healthcare and help at school What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cerebrovascular disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cerebrovascular-disease","content":"Cerebrovascular disease - Introduction - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cerebrovascular disease   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Definition Cerebrovascular-disease Clinical trials Cerebrovascular disease Cerebrovascular-disease Risks and prevention What are cerebrovascular diseases?  Cerebrovascular diseases are conditions caused by problems that affect the blood supply to the brain. Types of cerebrovascular disease There are a number of different types of cerebrovascular disease. The four most common types are: stroke \u2013 a serious medical condition where one part of the brain is damaged by a lack of blood supply or bleeding into the brain from a burst blood vessel  transient ischaemic attack (TIA) \u2013 a temporary fall in the blood supply to one part of the brain, resulting in brief symptoms similar to stroke  subarachnoid haemorrhage \u2013 a type of stroke where blood leaks out of the brain's blood vessels on to the surface of the brain vascular dementia \u2013 persistent impairment in mental ability resulting from stroke or other problems with blood circulation to the brain These are discussed in more detail below. Stroke To function properly, the brain needs oxygen and nutrients that are provided by the blood. However, if the blood supply is restricted or stopped, brain cells die, leading to brain damage and possibly death. A stroke happens when the blood supply to part of the brain is blocked or interrupted \u2013 for example, by a blood clot (where the blood thickens and solidifies). This is the most common cause of stroke and is known as an ischaemic stroke. The lack of blood causes part of the brain to die, a process known as cerebral infarction. About 10% of strokes are caused by bleeding from the arteries in the brain, which directly damages the brain's tissues and can also cause loss of blood supply. This is known as haemorrhagic stroke or cerebral haemorrhage. The main symptoms of a stroke can be remembered using the acronym FAST, which describes the Face-Arms-Speech-Time test. Each part of the test is explained below. Face \u2013 the person's face may have fallen on one side, they may be unable to smile, or their mouth or eye may have drooped Arms \u2013 they may be unable to raise one or both arms and keep them up as a result of weakness Speech \u2013 they may have slurred speech and difficulty finding words or understanding what is said to them Time \u2013 it's time to dial 999 immediately if you see any of these signs or symptoms Other common symptoms of stroke include sudden onset of: confusion unsteadiness or inability to walk loss of vision in one eye or on one side of the field of vision A stroke is a medical emergency \u2013 the sooner treatment is given in hospital, the less damage is likely to occur. Minutes count, so don't delay calling 999. Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) A transient ischaemic attack (TIA), or \"mini-stroke\", is caused by a temporary disruption in the blood supply to part of the brain. This results in a lack of oxygen and nutrition to that part of the brain, which stops it working until the blood supply is restored. A TIA causes similar symptoms to a stroke, but only lasts for a short period of time \u2013 TIAs usually last from a few minutes up to an hour, but any ischaemic attack lasting less than 24 hours is officially classed as a TIA. A TIA should always be taken seriously \u2013 if it's confirmed, TIA is an early warning sign of an impending stroke that could happen at any time, particularly in the next few days or weeks. If you or someone you know has a TIA, contact your GP, local hospital or out-of-hours service immediately to arrange for a specialist assessment. Subarachnoid haemorrhage A subarachnoid haemorrhage is a less common cause of a haemorrhagic stroke. It happens when blood leaks from blood vessels on to the surface of the brain. The bleeding occurs in the arteries that run underneath a membrane in the brain known as the arachnoid, which is located just below the surface of the skull. The bleeding can cause a sudden and very severe headache, often with neck stiffness. Someone who's had a subarachnoid haemorrhage may not have any other symptoms of stroke, although these may develop later as a result of complications of the bleeding. A subarachnoid haemorrhage is a medical emergency and needs immediate medical treatment to prevent serious complications, brain damage and death. Around three-quarters of all subarachnoid haemorrhages are the result of an aneurysm rupturing (bursting). An aneurysm is a bulge in a blood vessel caused by a weakness in the blood vessel wall. Other causes of a subarachnoid haemorrhage include severe head injury and a rare type of birth defect called arteriovenous malformation, which affects normal blood vessel formation. Vascular dementia Vascular dementia is a common form of dementia that affects more than 138,000 people in the UK. The term \"vascular dementia\" describes a widespread and persistent loss of mental ability caused by damage to brain cells as the result of a haemorrhage or a shortage of blood supply. Vascular dementia can occur as the result of a single stroke or multiple strokes, or it can occur without any any other symptoms. Children Cerebrovascular diseases are much less common in children. However, stroke can sometimes affect children. The Stroke Association estimate that childhood stroke affects around 5 out of every 100,000 children in the UK each year. Children can have an ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke, as well as a TIA. However, the common underlying causes are different in children. In children, stroke is often the result of pre-existing conditions such as congenital heart disease or sickle cell disease. It can also be caused by infections or an injury to the arteries in the neck during vigorous activities. The classic warning signs of a stroke are the same in adults and children. Dial 999 immediately to request an ambulance if you think your child has had a stroke.   The world's biggest killer Globally, cardiovascular diseases (which include cerebrovascular diseases) are responsible for more deaths than any other cause. In the UK, about a third of all deaths are caused by cardiovascular disease. Overall, coronary heart disease is the UK's biggest killer. Cancer claims the second highest number of lives, with stroke third. Read about the risk factors for cerebrovascular disease and how to prevent them. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2015 Next review due: 02\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 99 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood clots Cardiovascular disease Coronary heart disease Stroke Subarachnoid haemorrhage Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) External links British Heart Foundation: heart health The Circulation Foundation Lab Tests Online UK: cerebrovascular disease screening Transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs) TIAs are \"mini strokes\" caused by the blood supply to the brain becoming temporarily disrupted. Find out more about why they happen and how they're treated Cardiovascular disease Find out about the different types of CVD and how you can reduce your risk of developing it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cervical cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-cervix","content":"Cervical cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cervical cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-cervix Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-cervix Community Cervical cancer Cancer-of-the-cervix Symptoms Cancer-of-the-cervix Causes Cancer-of-the-cervix Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-cervix Treatment Cancer-of-the-cervix Complications Cancer-of-the-cervix Living with Cancer-of-the-cervix Prevention Introduction  Cervical cancer is a type of cancer that develops in a woman's cervix (the entrance to the womb from the vagina). Cancer of the cervix often has no symptoms in its early stages. If you do have symptoms, the most common is unusual vaginal bleeding, which can occur after sex, in between periods or after the menopause. Abnormal bleeding doesn't mean that you definitely have cervical cancer, but it should be investigated by your GP as soon as possible. If your GP thinks you might have cervical cancer, you should be referred to see a specialist within two weeks. Read more about the symptoms of cervical cancer and diagnosing cervical cancer. Screening for cervical cancer Over the course of many years, the cells lining the surface of the cervix undergo a series of changes. In rare cases, these precancerous cells can become cancerous. However, cell changes in the cervix can be detected at a very early stage and treatment can reduce the risk of cervical cancer developing. The NHS offers a cervical screening programme to all women from the age of 25. During cervical screening (previously known as a \"smear test\"), a small sample of cells is taken from the cervix and checked under a microscope for abnormalities. An abnormal cervical screening test doesn't mean you definitely have cancer. Most abnormal results are caused by an infection or the presence of treatable precancerous cells, rather than cancer itself. Women aged 25 to 49 years of age are offered screening every three years, and women aged 50 to 64 are offered screening every five years. For women who are 65 or older, only those who haven't been screened since they were 50, or those who have had recent abnormal tests, are offered screening. You should be sent a letter confirming when your screening appointment is due. Contact your GP if you think you may be overdue for a screening appointment. Read more about cervical screening. What causes cervical cancer? Almost all cases of cervical cancer are caused by the human papilloma virus (HPV). HPV is a very common virus that can be passed on through any type of sexual contact with a man or a woman. There are more than 100 different types of HPV, many of which are harmless. However, some types of HPV can cause abnormal changes to the cells of the cervix, which can eventually lead to cervical cancer. Two strains of the HPV virus (HPV 16 and HPV 18) are known to be responsible for 70% of all cases of cervical cancer. These types of HPV infection don't have any symptoms, so many women won't realise they have the infection. However, it's important to be aware that these infections are relatively common and most women who have them don't develop cervical cancer. Using condoms during sex offers some protection against HPV, but it can't always prevent infection, because the virus is also spread through skin-to-skin contact of the wider genital area. Since 2008, a HPV vaccine has been routinely offered to girls aged 12 and 13. Read more about the causes of cervical cancer and preventing cervical cancer. Treating cervical cancer If cervical cancer is diagnosed at an early stage, it's usually possible to treat it using surgery. In some cases, it's possible to leave the womb in place, but it may need to be removed. The surgical procedure used to remove the womb is called a hysterectomy. Radiotherapy is an alternative to surgery for some women with early stage cervical cancer. In some cases, it's used alongside surgery. More advanced cases of cervical cancer are usually treated using a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Some of the treatments used can have significant and long-lasting side effects, including early menopause and infertility. Read more about treating cervical cancer. Complications Many women with cervical cancer will have complications. These can arise as a direct result of the cancer or as a side effect of treatments such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgery. Complications associated with cervical cancer can range from the relatively minor, such as minor bleeding from the vagina or having to urinate frequently, to life-threatening, such as severe bleeding or kidney failure. Read more about the complications of cervical cancer. Outlook The stage at which cervical cancer is diagnosed is an important factor in determining a woman's outlook. The staging, given as a number from one to four, indicates how far the cancer has spread. The chances of living for at least five years after being diagnosed with cervical cancer are: stage 1 \u2013 80-99% stage 2 \u2013 60-90% stage 3 \u2013 30-50% stage 4 \u2013 20% Read more about the staging of cervical cancer. In the UK, just under 1,000 women die from cervical cancer every year. Who's affected by cervical cancer? Following the success of the NHS Cervical Screening Programme and the early detection of cell changes, the number of cervical cancer cases in the UK has reduced. Around 3,000 cases of cervical cancer are diagnosed in the UK each year. It's possible for women of all ages to develop cervical cancer, but the condition mainly affects sexually active women aged between 30 and 45. Cervical cancer is very rare in women under 25. Page last reviewed: 30\/04\/2015 Next review due: 30\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 284 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 151  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cervical screening HPV vaccination Find cancer support services for women Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: cervical cancer Jo's Cervical Cancer Trust My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services The Eve Appeal: cervical cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked Cervical screening Cervical screening is a way of detecting abnormal cells on a woman's cervix (the entrance to the womb from the vagina) HPV vaccination Why it's recommended teenage girls have the HPV (cervical cancer) vaccine Cervical cancer community Access Jo's Cervical Cancer Trust online forum and take part in the discussion Find and choose services for Cervical cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cervical cancer vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/hpv-human-papillomavirus-vaccine.aspx","content":"Human papilloma virus (HPV) cervical cancer vaccine - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: HPV vaccine All girls aged 12 to 13 are offered HPV (human papilloma virus) vaccination as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. The vaccine protects against cervical cancer. It's usually given to girls in year eight at schools in England. According to Cancer Research UK, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in women under the age of 35. In the UK, 2,900 women a year are diagnosed with cervical cancer, that's around eight women every day. Around 970 women died from cervical cancer in 2011 in the UK. It's estimated that about 400 lives could be saved every year in the UK as a result of vaccinating girls before they are infected with HPV. The HPV vaccine is delivered largely through secondary schools, and consists of two injections into the upper arm spaced at least six, and not more than 24 months apart (girls who began vaccination before September 2014 receive three injections). What is HPV? The human papilloma virus (HPV) is the name given to a family of viruses. Different types of HPV are classed as either high risk or low risk, depending on the conditions they can cause. For instance, some types of HPV can cause warts or verrucas. Other types are associated with cervical cancer. In 99% of cases, cervical cancer occurs as a result of a history of infection with high-risk types of HPV. Often, infection with the HPV causes no symptoms.  Read more about HPV. Different types of HPV and what they do There are over 100 different types of HPV, with around 40 types that affect the genital area. Infection with some high-risk types of HPV can cause abnormal tissue growth as well as other cell changes that can lead to cervical cancer. Infection with other types of HPV may cause: genital warts: small growths or skin changes on or around the genital or anal area, these are the most common viral sexually transmitted infection (STI) in the UK skin warts and verrucas vaginal cancer or vulval cancer (although these types of cancer are rare) anal cancer or cancer of the penis some cancers of the head and neck laryngeal papillomas (warts on the voice box or vocal cords) For more information see Why is the HPV vaccine needed? How the HPV vaccine helps A vaccine called Gardasil is used in the national NHS cervical cancer vaccination programme. Gardasil protects against the two types of HPV, between them responsible for more than 70% of cervical cancers in the UK. A bonus of using Gardasil to prevent cervical cancer is that it prevents genital warts too. Which girls should have the HPV vaccination? The HPV vaccine is part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme and is routinely offered to secondary school girls aged 12 and 13. It's a safe vaccine and there are very few girls who aren't suitable for HPV vaccination. However, special precautions may need to be taken for girls with certain health conditions, or who have ever had a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). Read more about who should have the HPV vaccine. Why is the HPV vaccine given at such a young age? The HPV virus is very common and is easily spread by sexual activity. As much as half the population will be infected at some time in their life. In most cases, the virus doesn't do any harm because your immune system gets rid of the infection. But in some cases, the infection persists and can lead to health problems. Although most girls don't start having sex until after they're 16 years of age, it's important that they are protected against HPV infection early enough and a good time is in the early teenage years. Getting the vaccine as early as possible will protect them in the future. Read more about how to prevent HPV infection. How is the HPV vaccine given? The HPV vaccine is currently given as a series of two injections within a six- to 24-month period. Girls who began their course of HPV vaccination before September 2014 receive three injections. Learn more about how the HPV vaccine is given. How long does the HPV vaccine protect for? Studies have already shown that the vaccine protects against HPV infection for around 10 years, although experts expect protection to be for much longer. Can girls who missed HPV vaccination still have it? Yes, if a girl misses either of her HPV vaccinations, for whatever reason, speak to her nurse or doctor about making another appointment, ideally as close as possible to the original one. Girls can have the HPV vaccination on the NHS up to age of 18. Girls who have the HPV vaccination after the age of 15 will need three doses as the response to two doses is not so good in older girls. Cervical screening and the HPV vaccine Cervical screening is a way of picking up abnormal cells in the cervix before they progress to cancer. It's been shown that early detection and treatment of cervical abnormalities picked up by screening can prevent three-quarters of cervical cancers. The NHS cervical screening programme involves checking women between the ages of 25 and 64 every three to five years for early cervical abnormalities. Regular cervical screening is the best way to identify abnormal cell changes in the cervix. So it's important that all girls who receive the HPV vaccine also have regular cervical screening once they reach the age of 25. Now, read why it's so important for 12-13 year-old girls to receive the HPV vaccination and find out more about the safety of the HPV vaccine. There is general information about the HPV vaccine in this NHS leaflet. Read more about how to prevent HPV infection. Read more about how to test for HPV infection. Find out how HPV infection is treated. Page last reviewed: 24\/09\/2014 Next review due: 24\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 229 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful NHS Choices links NHS vaccination schedule Common questions about vaccination Cervical cancer Cervical screening Genital warts External links NHS leaflet: HPV vaccination (PDF, 273kb) NHS leaflet: immunisations at secondary school (PDF, 419kb) Cancer Research UK: HPV vaccines healthtalk.org: the HPV vaccination programme Macmillan: HPV vaccine  DH Green Book: the HPV vaccine Jo's Cervical Cancer Trust Search for services Find and compare services Services GP Paediatrics services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress Cervical cancer Cervical cancer is an uncommon type of cancer that develops in the cervix (entrance to the womb) Teen girls 15-18 Read about teen girl health issues, including healthy eating, skin problems and having sex for the first time NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cervical screening","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cervical-screening-test","content":"Cervical screening - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cervical screening  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cervical-screening-test Clinical trials Cervical screening Cervical-screening-test Why it's offered Cervical-screening-test When it's offered Cervical-screening-test Results Introduction  A cervical screening test (previously known as a smear test) is a method of detecting abnormal cells on the cervix. The cervix is the entrance to the womb from the vagina. Detecting and removing abnormal cervical cells can prevent cervical cancer. Cervical screening isn't a test for cancer; it's a test to check the health of the cells of the cervix. Most women's test results show that everything is normal, but for around 1 in 20 women the test shows some abnormal changes in the cells of the cervix. Most of these changes won't lead to cervical cancer and the cells may go back to normal on their own. However, in some cases, the abnormal cells need to be removed so they can't become cancerous. About 3,000 cases of cervical cancer are diagnosed each year in the UK. It's possible for women of all ages to develop cervical cancer, although the condition mainly affects sexually active women aged 30 to 45. The condition is very rare in women under 25. The cervical screening programme The aim of the NHS Cervical Screening Programme is to reduce the number of women who develop cervical cancer and the number of women who die from the condition. Since the screening programme was introduced in the 1980s, the number of cervical cancer cases has decreased by about 7% each year. All women who are registered with a GP are invited for cervical screening: aged 25 to 49 \u2013 every three years aged 50 to 64 \u2013 every five years over 65 \u2013 only women who haven't been screened since age 50 or those who have recently had abnormal tests Being screened regularly means any abnormal changes in the cells of the cervix can be identified at an early stage and, if necessary, treated to stop cancer developing. However, cervical screening isn't 100% accurate and doesn't prevent all cases of cervical cancer. Screening is a personal choice and you have the right to choose not to attend. Read about: why cervical screening is offered when cervical screening is offered What happens when you go for cervical screening? Booking your test You'll receive a letter through the post asking you to make an appointment for a cervical screening test. The letter should contain the details of the place you need to contact for the appointment. Most women choose to go to their GP practice, although it may also be available at a well woman clinic or sexual health clinic. Screening is usually carried out by the practice nurse. You can ask to have a female doctor or nurse. If possible, try to book an appointment during the middle of your menstrual cycle (usually 14 days from the start of your last period), as this can ensure a better sample of cells is taken. If you use a spermicide, a barrier method of contraception or a lubricant jelly, you shouldn't use these for 24 hours before the test, as the chemicals they contain may affect the test. Your screening appointment The cervical screening test usually takes around five minutes to carry out. You'll be asked to undress from the waist down and lie on a couch, although you can usually remain fully dressed if you're wearing a loose skirt. The doctor or nurse will gently put an instrument, called a speculum, into your vagina. This holds the walls of the vagina open so the cervix can be seen. A small soft brush will be used to gently collect some cells from the surface of your cervix. Some women find the procedure a bit uncomfortable or embarrassing, but for most women it's not painful. If you find the test painful, tell the doctor or nurse, because they may be able to reduce your discomfort. Try to relax as much as possible, because being tense makes the test more difficult to carry out. Taking slow, deep breaths will help. The cell sample is then sent off to a laboratory for analysis and you should receive the result within two weeks. HPV testing Changes in the cells of the cervix are often caused by the human papilloma virus (HPV). There are more than 100 different types of HPV. Some types are high risk and some types are low risk. HPV-16 and HPV-18 are considered to be highest risk for cervical cancer. After successful trials, HPV testing has been incorporated into the NHS Cervical Screening Programme. If a sample taken during the cervical screening test shows low-grade or borderline cell abnormalities, the sample should automatically be tested for HPV. If HPV is found in your sample, you should be referred for a colposcopy for further investigation and, if necessary, treatment. If no HPV is found, you'll carry on being routinely screened as normal. If your sample shows more significant cell changes, you'll be referred for colposcopy without HPV testing. In some areas, a test for HPV is the first test on the screening sample. In these cases, the sample is only checked for abnormal cells if HPV is found. If HPV isn\u2019t found, you'll be offered a screening test again in three to five years (depending on your age). Read about the results of cervical screening tests. Jo's Cervical Cancer Trust: smear test discussions (forum) Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 07\/09\/2015 Next review due: 07\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 418 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 172  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your Guide to Cervical Screening Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This short film (made by Jo's Cervical Cancer Trust) aims to give you more information about smear tests: what the test is for and what will happen during the test. It also has information on the human papilloma virus (HPV), which is the main cause of cervical cancer and cervical abnormalities. Media last reviewed: 31\/05\/2016 Next review due: 31\/05\/2019 Useful links NHS Choices links Cervical cancer Colposcopy HPV vaccination Find a GP External links NHS Cervical Screening Programme Lab Tests Online UK: cervical cytology BSCCP Jo\u2019s Cervical Cancer Trust HPV vaccination Why it's recommended teenage girls have the HPV (cervical cancer) vaccine Cervical cancer Cervical cancer is an uncommon type of cancer that develops in the cervix (entrance to the womb) NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cervical rib","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cervical-rib","content":"Cervical rib - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cervical rib  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cervical rib Introduction  A cervical rib is an extra rib that forms above the normal first rib, growing from the base of the neck just above the collarbone. The defect is present at birth, but usually not noticed until later in life. It may be a fully-formed bony rib or just a thin strand of tissue fibres, which will not always show up on any X-ray or MRI scans you may have. If the extra rib is only partially formed, it may either end in a swelling that shows as a lump in the neck or it may tail off into a fibrous band of tissue that connects to the first proper rib. A cervical rib can sometimes squash one of the nearby blood vessels or nerves, causing problems such as neck pain and numbness in the arm. These symptoms are collectively known as thoracic outlet syndrome. Thoracic outlet syndrome Not all people with a cervical rib will develop thoracic outlet syndrome, and thoracic outlet syndrome can also be caused by other conditions. Two major blood vessels (the subclavian artery and subclavian vein) and a bunch of nerves called the brachial plexus pass over the cervical rib. They run through a narrow space at the base of the neck towards the armpit and arm. A cervical rib will only cause any symptoms if it is squashing these blood vessels or nerves. Symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome If the extra rib does press on a vessel or nerve, you may have any of the following symptoms: pain in the shoulder and neck, which spreads into the arm \u2013 this may come and go or be constant moments where you lose feeling and have weakness or tingling in the affected arm and fingers moments where you can't carry out fine hand movements, such as doing up buttons Raynaud's phenomenon, where the blood vessels go into a temporary spasm, affecting blood supply to the fingers and toes (turning them white) a blood clot forming in the subclavian artery, which can affect the blood supply to the fingers, causing small patches of red or black discolouration swelling in the affected arm (although this is rare) These symptoms vary widely from person to person: they may be mild or severe, be persistent or come and go. Thoracic outlet syndrome usually starts between the ages of 20 and 50 years old, and women are more likely than men to have it. Treatment Most people diagnosed with a cervical rib will find their symptoms get better with time, without treatment. Your GP may refer you to a physiotherapist for shoulder exercises designed to stretch and strengthen the neck region and correct any poor posture. The area may be massaged to release any tight or shortened neck tissues. A referral to an occupational therapist may also be useful, for advice on techniques to protect your back and neck while at work. To relieve any pain and inflammation, your GP may prescribe you an NSAID painkiller such as naproxen or diclofenac. Read more about non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). If you develop thoracic outlet syndrome you may also be prescribed thrombolytics to break up any blood clots, and anticoagulants to prevent further clots developing. If the above measures don't help and the symptoms persist, you may wish to consider surgical treatment to remove the extra rib, although this is often a last resort.  Your GP can refer you to hospital, at which point your consultant will be able to explain the details of this procedure to you. X-ray showing a cervical rib  Physiotherapy Find out how physiotherapy can help promote healing and wellbeing Page last reviewed: 05\/09\/2014 Next review due: 05\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 85 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Neck pain Shoulder pain X-ray Physiotherapy External links NINDS: thoracic outlet syndrome Neck pain or a stiff neck Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. Find out about the main causes and how to relieve it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cervical spondylosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cervical-spondylosis","content":"Cervical spondylosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cervical spondylosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cervical-spondylosis Clinical trials Cervical spondylosis Cervical-spondylosis Symptoms Cervical-spondylosis Causes Cervical-spondylosis Diagnosis Cervical-spondylosis Treatment Introduction  Cervical spondylosis is the medical term for neck pain caused by age-related \u2018wear and tear\u2019  to bones and tissues. The most common symptoms of cervical spondylosis are neck pain, stiffness and headaches. More rarely, it can trap nerves in the neck, leading to: pain radiating from the arms pins and needles in the arms and legs loss of feeling in your hands and legs loss of co-ordination and difficulty walking However, many people with cervical spondylosis experience no noticeable symptoms. Read more about the symptoms of cervical spondylosis. Treating cervical spondylosis In most cases, the symptoms of cervical spondylosis can be relieved using a combination of: medication \u2013 such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including ibuprofen exercise \u2013 such as swimming and walking self care techniques \u2013 such as supporting your neck with a firm pillow at night In a small number of cases, surgery may be required to remove or repair a damaged section of the cervical spine (see below). Read more about the treatment of cervical spondylosis. What causes cervical spondylosis? As people get older, the effects of ageing and everyday use causes wear to the joints and tissues that make up the spine. For example, the discs of the spine can dry out and shrink, and the ligaments can stiffen. In all the body's joints, there is a constant process of \"wear and repair\" happening, as the joints adapt to the stresses and strains of normal everyday life. Cervical spondylosis occurs when the balance of \"wear and repair\" is lost, leading to pain and stiffness in the neck. Read more about the causes of cervical spondylosis. Who is affected Cervical spondylosis is a very common condition. It's estimated that 9 out of 10 adults will have some degree of cervical spondylosis by the time they are 60 years old (but many will not have any noticeable symptoms). Outlook The outlook for most cases of cervical spondylosis is generally good. Most cases respond well to treatment after a few weeks, though it can be common for symptoms to reoccur later. In around 1 in 10 cases, a person can go on to develop long-term (chronic) neck pain.  Cervical spondylosis is an age-related condition that can cause stiffness and pain in the neck   The cervical spine The top section of the spine, known as the cervical spine, runs from the base of the skull and down through the neck. The cervical spine is made up of: vertebrae \u2013 wedge-shaped sections of bone discs \u2013 protective, circular pads of tissue found between each vertebrae ligaments \u2013 cords of tissue that connect one bone to another In addition, a bundle of nerves runs through a tunnel within the spine (the spinal cord).  10 surefire ways to beat pain Practical ways to beat pain, including relaxation tips, breathing exercises and self management courses Page last reviewed: 12\/09\/2014 Next review due: 12\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 550 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 218  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 179  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Neck pain Living with pain NSAIDs Back pain External links NICE: cervical disc replacement Myelopathy.org Ways to manage persistent pain If you're in pain, keeping active will help, as well as taking painkillers and doing physiotherapy Find and choose services for Cervical spondylosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CFS","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/chronic-fatigue-syndrome","content":"Chronic fatigue syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic fatigue syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Clinical trials Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Community Chronic fatigue syndrome Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Symptoms Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Causes Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Diagnosis Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Treatment Introduction  Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) causes persistent fatigue (exhaustion) that affects everyday life and doesn't go away with sleep or rest.  CFS is also known as ME, which stands for myalgic encephalomyelitis. There's some debate over the correct term to use for the condition, but these pages will refer to the condition as CFS. CFS is a serious condition that can cause long-term illness and disability, but many people \u2013 particularly children and young people \u2013 improve over time. Who is affected? It's estimated around 250,000 people in the UK have CFS. Anyone can get the condition, although it's more common in women than men. It usually develops when people are in their early 20s to mid-40s. Children can also be affected, usually between the ages of 13 and 15.  How it affects quality of life Most cases of CFS are mild or moderate, but up to one in four people with CFS have severe symptoms. These are defined as follows:  mild \u2013 you're able to care for yourself, but may need days off work to rest moderate \u2013 you may have reduced mobility, and your symptoms can vary; you may also have disturbed sleep patterns and need to sleep in the afternoon severe \u2013 you're able to carry out minimal daily tasks, such as brushing your teeth, but have significantly reduced mobility, and may also have difficulty concentrating Read more about the symptoms of CFS. Why it happens It's not known exactly what causes CFS. Various theories have been suggested, including: a viral or bacterial infection problems with the immune system an imbalance of hormones psychiatric problems, such as stress and emotional trauma Some people are thought to be more susceptible to the condition because of their genes, as the condition is more common in some families. More research is needed to confirm exactly what causes the condition. Read more about the causes of CFS. How it is diagnosed There are specific guidelines issued by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) about the diagnosis and management of CFS. NICE says a diagnosis of CFS should be considered if you meet specific criteria regarding your fatigue \u2013 for example, it can't be explained by other conditions \u2013 and if you also have other symptoms, such as sleeping problems or problems thinking and concentrating. The diagnosis can then be confirmed if these symptoms are experienced for several months. Read more about diagnosing CFS. How it is treated Treatment for CFS may be able to reduce the symptoms. Everyone with CFS responds to treatment differently, so your treatment plan will be tailored to you. Some of the main treatments include: cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) a structured exercise programme called graded exercise therapy medication to control pain, nausea and sleeping problems Most people with CFS improve over time, although some people don't make a full recovery. It's also likely there will be periods when symptoms get better or worse. Children and young people with CFS are more likely to recover fully. Read more about treating CFS. Different terms for the condition chronic fatigue syndrome \u2013 often used and preferred by doctors as there's little evidence of brain and spinal cord inflammation, which the term ME suggests; ME is also thought to be too specific to cover all the symptoms of the condition myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) \u2013 preferred by those who feel CFS is not specific enough and doesn't reflect the severity and different types of fatigue, and implies that fatigue is the only symptom (myalgic encephalopathy is sometimes also used) systemic exertion intolerance disease (SEID) \u2013 a new term suggested in a 2015 report by the US Institute of Medicine, which implies that the condition affects many systems in the body (systemic); the word \"disease\" highlights the serious nature of the condition in some people Page last reviewed: 25\/02\/2015 Next review due: 25\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1409 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 407  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 246  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 152  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 162  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 442  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) video Depression Insomnia Why am I tired all the time? External links Action for ME Association of Young People with ME Brain and Spine Foundation Invest in ME The ME Association ME Research UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): chronic fatigue syndrome The National ME Centre Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Chronic fatigue syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tiredness","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/tiredness-and-fatigue\/Pages\/tiredness-and-fatigue.aspx","content":"Tiredness and fatigue - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tiredness and fatigue Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Fatigue Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Why am I tired all the time? One in five of us feel unusually tired at any one time. Find out the common causes of fatigue. Why lack of sleep is bad for your health Sleep deprivation can raise your risk of diabetes, weight gain, depression and more. 10 medical reasons for feeling tired Many health conditions can cause fatigue, including restless legs, diabetes and food intolerance. Self-help tips to fight fatigue Many cases of unexplained tiredness are due to lifestyle factors. Use these self-help tips to restore your energy. Eight energy stealers Not sure what\u2019s causing your fatigue? Some surprising energy sappers may be to blame. Energy booster myths and facts Detox, superfoods and vitamin pills are touted as energisers, but there's no magic cure for tiredness. The energy diet Tips on what to eat (and drink) if you want to banish tiredness and feel full of energy. 10 tips to beat insomnia Following these simple lifestyle changes can greatly improve your quality of sleep. 5 ways to wipe out winter tiredness Feel sleepy when the days are shorter? You're not alone. Try these six ways to banish winter weariness. Getting started Find out how to tackle insomnia Get tiredness tips from the Royal College of Psychiatrists Healthy sleep tips for children Follow us on Twitter Join more than 160,000 who follow @NHSChoices for the latest and best health news and lifestyle advice Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Diabetes type I Diabetes type II GP Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Could you be depressed? Take this short test to find out Are you at risk of diabetes? Take this short test to find out more Are you a healthy weight Check your weight and get tailored advice Get apps for sleep problems Find NHS-reviewed apps to help you deal with insomnia and other sleep problems Sleep problems in young children How to deal with sleep problems in young children, including frequent waking and nightmares Tiredness in pregnancy Find out about sleeplessness and feeling tired in pregnancy, and what you can do to help Why teenagers are always tired You might think teenagers sleep their lives away, but the opposite is true. Living with insomnia Find out what easy lifestyle changes you can make to improve your sleep NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chalazion","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/eyelid-problems","content":"Eyelid problems - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Eyelid problems  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Eyelid problems Introduction  Eyelid problems are common and rarely serious, but see your GP if you're worried or your eye is particularly uncomfortable. Contact your GP or NHS 111 immediately, or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department, if you also have pain in or around your eye or any loss of vision. The information below should give you an idea of what might be wrong, although it shouldn't be used to self-diagnose your condition. It covers possible causes for the following eyelid problems, plus specific advice about what to do. You can find out about: swollen eyelids or eyelid cysts   itchy, flaky or sticky eyelids  lumps on or around the eyelids  hooded or droopy upper eyelids  rolling outwards of the lower eyelids (ectropion)  rolling inwards of the eyelids (entropion)  yellow plaques on the eyelids  excessive blinking or uncontrollable closure of the eyelids  Swollen eyelid or eyelid cyst It's quite common for the upper or lower eyelid to become swollen because of a meibomian cyst (also called a chalazion). This occurs when the glands in the eyelid become blocked. These cysts vary in size, from barely visible to the size of a grape. They usually take weeks to develop. They're not usually painful, but can become red and painful if infected. The cysts can come and go by themselves, although they may take a few months to get better. You can help them heal by holding a clean flannel warmed in hot water to the closed eye for five minutes, and repeating this three to four times a day for up to four weeks. Speak to your GP if you have a cyst that doesn't clear up after a month. They can refer you to have it drained through a small incision (cut). This is a simple procedure carried out under local anaesthetic (your eye area will be numbed). It takes just a few minutes and rarely leaves a scar. Also see your GP if the cyst becomes infected because you may need to take antibiotics to prevent a deep lid infection (cellulitis). Another common cause of a swelling on the eyelid is a stye. A stye is a minor infection of the base of an eyelash that usually clears up on its own in a week or two. Holding a warm flannel to it regularly may help it heal faster. Read more about treating styes. Other causes of lid swelling include an allergic reaction and shingles on the face and eye (usually with a rash), but these are less common. Itchy, flaky or sticky eyelids Itchy and flaky eyelids are usually caused by an inflamed eyelid edge (blepharitis) or dry eye. Your eyelids may also stick together and be difficult to open, particularly when you wake up. These conditions can be irritating, but are rarely serious. You can reduce the irritation by keeping the eyelids clean and using artificial tears if your eyes are dry. Read about treating blepharitis and treating dry eyes. Contact dermatitis is another possible cause of itchy or flaky eyelids. This is a type of eczema triggered when the skin comes into contact with something you are irritated by or allergic to, such as make-up. The condition usually clears up after you stop using the substance your skin is reacting to. Sticky eyelids along with red and watering eyes can be caused by conjunctivitis, which is when an infection, allergy or irritant causes the front of the eye to become inflamed. This can get better on its own, although your GP may be able to prescribe medication to treat the underlying cause. Read more about treating conjunctivitis. Lumps on or around the eyelids Just like anywhere else on the skin, lumps can occur on or around the eyelids. Many lumps are simple cysts or styes (see above). However, occasionally a lump can be a sign of a more serious condition such as skin cancer and may need to be removed. See your GP if you're worried about a lump on or around your eyelids. Most skin cancers are basal cell carcinomas, which very rarely spread to other parts of the body. These often appear as a red or pink lump containing small blood vessels, although they can be pearly-white or \"waxy\" looking. Sometimes they may bleed. Less commonly, the lump may be a squamous cell carcinoma, which is more serious as there\u2019s a small risk it could spread to other parts of the body. These usually look like an ulcer with a red base and a scaly and crusted surface. You may also lose eyelashes where the lump is growing. In rare cases, the lump could be a sign of a very serious type of skin cancer called melanoma that can spread to other parts of the body and can be very dangerous. A lump is more likely to be melanoma if it's an irregular shape, dark or changing in colour, and getting a lot bigger over time. Hooded or droopy upper eyelids As you get older, it's quite common to have excess skin above the upper eyelids that can overhang and block your vision. This is called dermatochalasis. If it affects your vision, surgery may be considered to remove the excess skin (blepharoplasty). However, this operation isn\u2019t routinely funded on the NHS so your doctor would need to submit a funding request for this to be considered. If the edge of your upper lid droops down over your eye, it's called ptosis. This is usually age-related and develops slowly. Surgery may be needed if the edge of the lid droops so much your vision is affected. In rare cases, ptosis isn't related to age and may be caused by serious conditions such as myasthenia gravis or a brain tumour. In these cases, it's likely there would be other symptoms too. See your GP immediately if ptosis comes on rapidly, over days or weeks, or if it's associated with other symptoms, such as a headache, loss of vision or a change in the size of the pupil (the black dot at the centre of the eye). Lower eyelid that rolls outwards (ectropion)  As you get older, one or both lower eyelids can sometimes droop away from the eye and turn outwards. This is known as an ectropion. The drooping eyelid can disrupt the normal production of tears, which can cause your eye to become dry, red and irritated. Treatment may not be needed in mild cases, although drops or ointment may help make your eye more comfortable. Sometimes a minor operation is needed to correct the position of the eyelid. Read more about treating ectropion. Eyelids that roll inwards (entropion) Entropion is where the eyelid rolls inwards. It usually affects the lower lids, but it can also affect the upper lids. Like ectropion, this is often age-related. Entropion usually causes an uncomfortable watery eye because the lashes irritate the front of the eye (cornea). If this is mild, using eyedrops may be enough to protect the eye and keep you comfortable. Severe entropion can be painful and cause vision loss by damaging the cornea. Occasionally, a corneal ulcer can form and become infected. Surgery may be needed to correct entropion if it's posing a risk to the health of your eye or is causing considerable discomfort. This is carried out under local anaesthetic. If you have entropion, you should discuss your treatment options with your GP. Consult your GP immediately if your eye becomes painful and red and your vision is affected. Yellow plaques on the eyelids Flat yellow patches (plaques) over the upper or lower eyelids are called xanthelasma.  Although these plaques are harmless, they indicate you have high cholesterol. See your GP because you may be at risk of developing cardiovascular disease, such as heart attacks and strokes. Making changes to your diet and taking medication may be recommended to reduce your cholesterol level and reduce your risk of serious problems in the future, although these may not improve the plaques. If you're bothered by the appearance of the plaques, it may be possible for them to be surgically removed or treated with a laser. However, this isn't normally funded on the NHS. Excessive blinking or uncontrollable closure of the eyelids It's quite common and normal for the eyelid to flicker or twitch occasionally, particularly when you're tired. It's more unusual to have repeated spasms of excessive blinking and involuntary closure of one or both eyes. This is a type of dystonia (a movement disorder that causes muscle spasms and contractions) known as blepharospasm. Each spasm can last for a few seconds to a few minutes. The exact cause of blepharospasm is unknown. However, the blinking and closure can be triggered by bright light, stress or tiredness. Severe blepharospasm can be very disabling and embarrassing. However, an effective treatment is available. It involves having small injections of botulinum toxin (such as Botox) into the face to relax the muscles controlling the eyelids. In some cases, your GP may consider referring you to a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves) for further investigation. Page last reviewed: 03\/06\/2015 Next review due: 03\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 572 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 241  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 153  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blepharitis Conjunctivitis Dry eye syndrome Ectropion Styes Watering eyes External links Easy read information about looking after your eyelids (PDF, 101kb) The Royal College of Ophthalmologists: patient information Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chapped lips","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/dry-lips","content":"Sore or dry lips - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sore or dry lips  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Dry lips Introduction  Your lips can become chapped and dry when they're exposed to the sun, wind or cold air. A lip balm containing petroleum or beeswax will provide a barrier and help seal in moisture. More moisture is lost through the lips than through any other part of the face or body. When the lips lose moisture, the skin covering them can become tight and start to split. What not to do It's very tempting to pick and bite off flakes of dried skin, but this will only make your lips bleed and heal more slowly. Irritating the skin around your mouth may also trigger a cold sore if you're prone to getting them. It's also tempting to keep licking dry or cracked lips. But this will only dry your lips more, as the saliva evaporates and the repeated licking or wetting \"washes\" the natural grease off the skin. How to treat dry or sore lips The best thing to do if you have dry or sore lips is to regularly apply a lip balm containing petroleum or beeswax. You may need to try a few different products before you find one that works for you. For example, you may be sensitive to fragranced products, in which case non-fragranced lip balms are available. If you're going to be spending time outdoors in the sun, choose a lip balm with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 to help protect your lips. Lip balm acts as a shield to protect your lips against the sun, wind and cold or dry air. It will trap moisture and seal cracks against infection. Avoid lip balms in pots \u2013 repeatedly dipping your finger into the balm can introduce germs. Covering your lips with a scarf when you're outside during the winter can also help prevent dry lips. When dry lips become inflamed Sometimes dry lips can become inflamed and feel sore. The medical term for inflamed lips is cheilitis. Lips usually become inflamed as a result of mild irritation. They can also become inflamed if they're infected with bacteria or fungi that have entered cracks in the skin of the lips. If the corners of your mouth are red and sore, you may have a type of inflammation called angular cheilitis. This is often caused by bacteria or fungi and is treated with ointments applied to the area. Angular cheilitis can sometimes be a symptom of a type of eczema called contact dermatitis, and is more common in people who wear dentures. It's also more common in older people \u2013 with age, the creases around the corners of the mouth become more pronounced, and saliva can build up in the crevices and irritate the skin. When to see your GP See your GP if your lips are red and sore and you think they're infected. They may prescribe an antibiotic or antifungal cream to treat the infection. This may also contain 1% hydrocortisone (steroid medication) to reduce the inflammation. If you have a non-healing persistent sore, this should be seen by your GP as soon as possible. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/09\/2015 Next review due: 09\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 621 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 287  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 158  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chilblains Look after your skin External links DermNet NZ: inflamed lips Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer Five ways to stay healthy this winter It may be cold outside, but winter needn't be the unhealthiest time of year for you and your family NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease","content":"Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Clinical trials Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Community Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Symptoms Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Causes Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Diagnosis Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Treatment Introduction  Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a group of inherited conditions that damage the peripheral nerves. It's also known as hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN). The peripheral nerves are found outside the main central nervous system (brain and spinal cord). They control the muscles and relay sensory information, such as the sense of touch, from the limbs to the brain. People with CMT may have: muscle weakness in the feet, ankles, legs and hands an awkward way of walking (gait) highly arched or very flat feet numbness in the feet, arms and hands The symptoms of CMT usually start to appear between the ages of five and 15, although they sometimes don't develop until well into middle age or later. CMT is a progressive condition. This means the symptoms slowly get worse, making everyday tasks increasingly difficult. Read more about the symptoms of CMT What causes CMT? CMT is caused by an inherited fault in one of the many genes responsible for the development of the peripheral nerves. This fault means the nerves become damaged over time. A child with CMT may have inherited the genetic fault responsible for the disease from one or both of their parents. There's no single faulty gene that causes CMT. There are many varieties of CMT that are caused by different genetic faults and these can be inherited in several different ways. The chances of passing CMT to your child depend on the specific genetic faults you and your partner carry. Read more about the causes of CMT. Testing for CMT See your GP if you think you may be developing symptoms of CMT. If your GP suspects CMT, they'll refer you to a neurologist (a doctor who specialises in treating conditions of the nervous system) for further tests to confirm the diagnosis. You should also see your GP if you or your partner have a family history of CMT and are considering having a baby. Your GP can refer you for genetic counselling, where you can discuss your concerns and the options available with a genetics specialist. Read more about diagnosing CMT. How CMT is treated There's currently no cure for CMT. However treatments can help relieve symptoms, aid mobility and increase the independence and quality of life for people with the condition. These treatments may include: physiotherapy and certain types of exercise occupational therapy walking aids In some cases, surgery may be needed to correct problems such as flat feet and muscle contractures (where muscles shorten and lose their normal range of movement). Read more about treating CMT. Living with CMT CMT isn't life-threatening and most people with the condition have the same life expectancy as a person without the condition. However, it can make everyday activities very difficult. Living with a long-term, progressive condition can also have a significant emotional impact. Some people find it helpful to speak to others with the condition through support groups. You may also benefit from a talking therapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). You can find more information, support and practical advice about living with CMT on the CMT UK website. CMT UK is the main charity and support group for people with CMT in the UK. Information about you If you have CMT, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 22\/03\/2016 Next review due: 22\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 186 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is also known as hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy. An expert explains what the disease is, how it affects the nervous system and the possible causes. There is currently no cure for CMT. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Living with disability Physiotherapy Hereditary neuropathy with pressure palsies (HNPP) Practical guide for carers External links CMT UK Muscular Dystrophy Campaign: CMT Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with a disability Get practical, financial and emotional support, whether you're disabled or a carer Find and choose services for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Charles Bonnet syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/charles-bonnet-syndrome","content":"Charles Bonnet syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Charles Bonnet syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Charles Bonnet syndrome Introduction  In Charles Bonnet syndrome, a person whose vision has started to deteriorate sees things that aren't real (hallucinations). The hallucinations may be simple patterns, or detailed images of events, people or places. They're only visual and don't involve hearing things or any other sensations. It's important to be aware that hallucinations associated with Charles Bonnet syndrome are caused by failing eyesight. They're not caused by a mental health problem or dementia. People with Charles Bonnet syndrome are usually aware that the visions aren't real, even if they're vivid. Always see your GP if you're experiencing hallucinations so they can investigate the cause. Types of hallucination There are two main types of hallucination that people with Charles Bonnet syndrome tend to experience. They may see: simple repeated patterns complex images of people, objects or landscapes Simple repeated patterns can take the form of grids, shapes or lines, which can appear in bright or vivid colours. The patterns may lay across or cover everything the person sees. More complex hallucinations can involve people, places, animals and insects. Most people don't see hallucinations of people they know or past events they've experienced. The hallucinations aren't usually unpleasant or threatening, but they may be slightly frightening when first experienced. The can sometimes occur out of the blue, and can last for a few minutes or several hours. They may be moving or static. Who's affected and why? Charles Bonnet syndrome affects people who've lost most or all of their eyesight. It's more likely to occur if vision loss affects both eyes. According to the Macular Society, up to half of all people with macular degeneration \u2013 a gradual loss of central vision \u2013 may experience Charles Bonnet hallucinations at some time. It's thought there are more than 100,000 cases in the UK. People of any age can be affected by Charles Bonnet hallucinations, but they tend to occur later in life after a person starts to lose their sight. The hallucinations often begin when a person's sight suddenly deteriorates.  The main cause of Charles Bonnet syndrome is thought to be vision loss and how the brain reacts to it. It's not clear how loss of vision leads to hallucinations, but research is beginning to help us better understand the relationship between the eyes and the brain.  When a person starts to lose their sight, their brain doesn't receive as much information as it used to. It's thought the brain sometimes responds by filling in the gaps with fantasy patterns or images that it's stored. These stored images are experienced as hallucinations. What effect can hallucinations have? Visual hallucinations are a normal response the brain has to the loss of vision. However, as Charles Bonnet syndrome isn't widely known, many people worry about what it means and fear they may be developing a serious mental illness or dementia. It can also cause practical problems. People who see complex hallucinations may find it difficult to get around. Streets and rooms may be distorted, and brickwork or fencing may appear directly in front of you, making it difficult to judge exactly where you are and whether you can walk straight ahead. Some people can overcome this problem by having good knowledge of their surroundings. Complex hallucinations can be unsettling. Although the visions may not be frightening, it can be disturbing to suddenly see strangers in your home or garden. For most people, the hallucinations will improve over time, with episodes becoming shorter and less frequent. Recent evidence suggests most people will still have occasional hallucinations five years or more after they first started. If the hallucinations do stop entirely, there's always a chance they'll reappear after a further decline in vision.  Diagnosing Charles Bonnet syndrome There isn't a specific test for Charles Bonnet syndrome. Doctors diagnose it by: talking to the person about their symptoms taking a detailed medical history in some cases, carrying out tests to rule out other possible causes of hallucinations, such as Alzheimer's disease If a person has vision loss and they're experiencing simple or complex hallucinations and they don't have signs of dementia or mental illness, they probably have Charles Bonnet syndrome.  Treating Charles Bonnet syndrome There's currently no cure for Charles Bonnet syndrome. Simply understanding that the hallucinations are a normal consequence of vision loss, rather than a mental health problem, can be very reassuring and help the person cope better. No specific medication has been shown to stop hallucinations caused by Charles Bonnet syndrome. Some medications that are designed to treat epilepsy, Parkinson's disease and dementia have proved effective for some people. However, these powerful medications can have serious side effects, and are therefore only recommended for people who are severely affected and under close supervision. Self-help measures You could try some self-help measures to help relieve your hallucinations when you experience them. For example, when a hallucination starts, you could: change the lighting conditions to see if it disappears \u2013 for example, if you're in a dimly lit area, switch on more lights or move to somewhere that's brighter; if in a brightly lit area, make it dimmer move your eyes from left to right \u2013 do this once every second 15 times without moving your head, then pause for a few seconds and repeat; it's worth trying this up to four or five times   stare at the image and blink rapidly or reach out to touch the vision \u2013 try this for a few seconds  move around or perform a task \u2013 for example, get up to make a cup of tea make sure you're well rested and are getting enough sleep at night \u2013 the hallucinations may be worse when you're tired or stressed Some people overcome their fear by getting to know the figures in their visions. For example, one man with Charles Bonnet syndrome has described how when he wakes up in the morning, he says, \"Right, what have you got in store for me today?\" to the figures he's seeing. This allows him to have some control over the way he feels about his visions. Help and support If you have Charles Bonnet syndrome, talking about your hallucinations and how they make you feel may help you cope better. You could try talking to your family, friends, GP, optician, or ophthalmologist. Mental health professionals, such as counsellors, psychologists or psychiatrists, may also be able to help if you're finding the hallucinations particularly upsetting. Although Charles Bonnet syndrome isn't a mental health condition, many mental health professionals have experience of helping people come to terms with hallucinations. Your GP should be able to refer you to your local mental health team. Read more about counselling and psychotherapy. There aren't many specific support groups and forums for people affected by Charles Bonnet syndrome, but there are lots of support groups for people with vision loss.  The Macular Society runs a buddy service for people affected by Charles Bonnet syndrome, where they can put you in touch with someone who's also experienced visual hallucinations for support and reassurance. Their helpline is available on 0300 30 30 111, Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm. Esme's Umbrella, an awareness campaign for Charles Bonnet syndrome, has a website with links to information and helpful resources for both patients and healthcare professionals. The Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) also has more information and advice about Charles Bonnet syndrome. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/02\/2016 Next review due: 15\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 82 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Eye health Hallucinations Macular degeneration External links Esme's Umbrella: greater awareness of Charles Bonnet syndrome Macular Society: visual hallucinations (PDF, 89.6kb) RNIB: Charles Bonnet syndrome Visionary: linking local sight loss charities Blindness and vision loss Information for people with vision loss, including details of support organisations, plus advice about specialist equipment, home modifications, and mobility Living with low vision Nearly 2 million people in the UK are affected by low vision. But with the right help, your eyesight can be maximised NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chemical peels","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/Chemical-peels.aspx","content":"Chemical peels Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Chemical peels Chemical peels are liquids brushed on to the face to remove dead skin cells and stimulate the growth of new cells. The aim of this cosmetic procedure is to improve the appearance of the facial skin \u2013 for example, by reducing age spots and evening out skin tone. There are three types of peel: superficial, medium and deep. See What it involves for more information. Superficial and medium peels are usually safe, provided they're administered correctly. Deeper peels are more risky. Before you go ahead Chemical peels can be expensive and have their limitations. Cost: In the UK, chemical peels cost about £60-£100 for mild peels. Deeper peels may cost over £500. Limitations: The effects of a superficial or medium peel aren't permanent. The effects of a deeper peel are long-lasting, but this is much more expensive, painful and risky. Safety: Take time to find a reputable practitioner who is properly qualified and practises in a clean, safe and appropriate environment. Ask the practitioner what you should do if something were to go wrong.  What it involves Superficial peels: skin cells removed from the top layer of skin (epidermis) left on the skin for a few minutes skin may feel tight for a couple of hours afterwards regular treatment needed to maintain the effects Medium peels: skin cells removed from the top and middle layers of skin left on the skin for a few minutes a burning or stinging sensation may be felt when the peel is applied skin may go brown or red in the days afterwards it can take up to six weeks for the skin to return to normal treatment is needed every 6 to 12 months to maintain the effects Deep peels: affect deeper layers of skin  a local anaesthetic and sedative may be needed a freezing sensation may be felt when the peel is applied can be left on the face for 30 minutes or more, depending on the desired effect your heart and blood pressure need to be monitored as phenol, the chemical used, can cause dangerous effects on the heart and kidneys expect some peeling, redness and discomfort for a few days swelling can last up to two weeks skin redness can last up to three months often results in lightening of the skin, so it's not really suitable for darker skin it's a one-off treatment with lasting effects, so doesn't usually need to be repeated Risks Possible risks include: darkening or lightening of the skin \u2013 this can be permanent cold sores returning if you've had these before scarring or an infection \u2013 although this is rare As it heals, your skin would also be more sensitive to the sun, so you need to use sunscreen for at least a month after treatment. The practitioner carrying out the procedure should advise how you can reduce your risk of side effects and complications. What to do if you have problems If you're not happy with the results or are experiencing problems, take up the matter with your practitioner through the clinic where you were treated. If there are any complications that require medical attention, it is best that you go back to the practitioner who treated you. If this is not possible, you can go to your GP or local accident and emergency (A&E) department. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links Acne  News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation  Save Face: find a practitioner for non-surgical cosmetic procedures  Microdermabrasion Considering microdermabrasion? Read this advice first... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chemotherapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chemotherapy","content":"Chemotherapy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chemotherapy    Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chemotherapy Clinical trials Chemotherapy Chemotherapy Who can use it Chemotherapy What happens Chemotherapy Side effects Introduction  Chemotherapy is a type of cancer treatment, with medicine used to kill cancer cells.  It kills the cancer cells by damaging them, so they can't reproduce and spread. Why chemotherapy is used Chemotherapy is used if a cancer has spread or if there's a risk that it will. The main aim of treatment may be: to try to cure cancer completely \u2013 this is known as curative chemotherapy to help make other treatments more effective \u2013 for example, chemotherapy can be combined with radiotherapy (where radiation is used to kill cancerous cells), or it can be used before surgery to reduce the risk of the cancer returning after radiotherapy or surgery  to relieve symptoms \u2013 a cure may not be possible for advanced cancer, but chemotherapy may be used to relieve the symptoms and slow it down; this is known as palliative chemotherapy Less commonly, chemotherapy is used to treat non-cancerous conditions. For example, low doses have been used to treat lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. How chemotherapy is used There are many different types of chemotherapy medication, but they all work in much the same way. Depending on the type of cancer you have, you may be treated with one medicine (monotherapy) or with a combination of medicines (combination therapy). There are several ways in which chemotherapy medication can be given, including tablets and injections directly into a vein. The team caring for you will help come up with a treatment plan for your specific circumstances. Read more about how chemotherapy is carried out and who can use chemotherapy. Side effects Even though chemotherapy is often effective at treating cancer or relieving its symptoms, it does cause side effects. The medicines used in chemotherapy can't distinguish between fast-growing cancer cells and other types of fast-growing cells, such as blood cells, skin cells and the cells inside the stomach. This means that most chemotherapy medications have a poisonous effect on the body's cells, causing problems including: feeling tired and weak all the time feeling and being sick  hair loss  Some people only have minimal side effects, but for most people, a course of chemotherapy can be unpleasant and upsetting. Living with and adapting to the side effects of chemotherapy can be challenging. However, it's important to realise that most, if not all, side effects will disappear once the treatment is complete. There is no risk of the side effects of chemotherapy being passed to other people, including children and pregnant women, if they are in close contact with someone having chemotherapy. Read more about the possible side effects of chemotherapy. Targeted therapies In the past, any medication used to treat cancer was regarded as chemotherapy. However, over the last 20 years, new types of medication that work in a different way to chemotherapy have been introduced. These new types of medication are known as targeted therapies. This is because they're designed to target and disrupt one or more of the biological processes that cancerous cells use to grow and reproduce. In contrast, chemotherapy medications are designed to have a poisonous effect on cancerous cells. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS organisations that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population that they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for breast cancer, bowel cancer and lung cancer survival (PDF, 900 Kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 20\/02\/2015 Next review due: 20\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 381 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Common questions about cancer Depression Find cancer support services Guide to caring Living with cancer Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: chemotherapy Macmillan: chemotherapy Macmillan: how others can help My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Yellow Card Scheme Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Flu and the flu vaccine Your guide to flu symptoms and the flu vaccine, including who should be vaccinated this winter NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Living with cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Cancer\/Pages\/Cancerhome.aspx","content":"Living with cancer - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Living with cancer Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Cancer, living with Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus One for the Boys: why do men not talk about cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Early cancer diagnosis is key, but that doesn't mean men always get checked out when they should. In this video, actors and sports personalities try to answer the question: Why are men so dumb when it comes to talking about cancer? All NHS Choices videos Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Preparing for your cancer test results If you're waiting for your cancer test results, here's how you can prepare for your consultation. Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a diagnosis and where to find support. Plus watch a video about one man's experience of cancer. Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your priority is medical care. But you can also get help in other areas of life. Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support. Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment. Living with lung cancer Practical advice for living with lung cancer, covering finances, feelings and controlling symptoms. Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions. 'I had breast cancer and then cervical cancer' Juanita explains the impact of cancer on her life, and how charity work helps others and brings her happiness. 'I beat testicular cancer' Former footballer Neil Harris talks about having testicular cancer, including his treatment and telling his family. Cancer: end of life care Information on coping with a terminal cancer diagnosis, including advice on counselling, practical issues and financial help. Talking to your kids about cancer Talking to children about your cancer may be difficult, but these tips can make it easier for you and them. Lung cancer myths and facts We separate the facts from the fiction about lung cancer and its link with smoking and other risk factors. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler talks about her experience of being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. 'I had prostate cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Philip Kissi didn't notice any symptoms. He talks about his diagnosis and treatment. 'My daughter Caron's breast cancer' TV star Caron Keating died from breast cancer in 2004. Her mother, Gloria Hunniford, explains how she coped. Getting started Why a balanced diet is important Keep skin safe in the sun Get help to stop smoking Cut down on your drinking Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Medical Oncology Information and support for mental health Renal units Alcohol addiction Stroke End of life hospice services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Bowel cancer self-assessment Do you have any symptoms? Mole self-assessment Find out if your moles need to be checked Also on NHS Choices Different types of cancer Breast cancer: female Breast cancer: male Bowel cancer Cervical cancer Lung cancer Skin cancer: malignant melanoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Common questions about cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines Breast cancer Information on breast changes to watch out for, plus breast cancer genes, breast reconstruction and mastectomy Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chest infection, adult","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chest-infection-adult","content":"Chest infection - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chest infection  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chest-infection-adult Clinical trials Chest infection Introduction  Chest infections are common, especially after a cold or flu during autumn and winter. Although most are mild and get better on their own, some can be serious or even life-threatening. Signs and symptoms of a chest infection The main symptoms of a chest infection can include: a persistent cough coughing up yellow or green phlegm (thick mucus), or coughing up blood breathlessness or rapid and shallow breathing wheezing a high temperature (fever) a rapid heartbeat chest pain or tightness feeling confused and disorientated You may also experience more general symptoms of an infection, such as a headache, fatigue, sweating, loss of appetite, or joint and muscle pain. What causes chest infections? A chest infection is an infection of the lungs or airways. The main types of chest infection are bronchitis and pneumonia. Most bronchitis cases are caused by viruses, whereas most pneumonia cases are due to bacteria. These infections are usually spread when an infected person coughs or sneezes. This launches tiny droplets of fluid containing the virus or bacteria into the air, where they can be breathed in by others. The infections can also be spread to others if you cough or sneeze onto your hand, an object or a surface, and someone else shakes your hand or touches those surfaces before touching their mouth or nose. Certain groups of people have a higher risk of developing serious chest infections, such as: babies and very young children children with developmental problems people who are very overweight elderly people pregnant women people who smoke people with long-term health conditions, such as asthma, heart disease, diabetes, kidney disease, cystic fibrosis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) people with a weakened immune system \u2013 this could be due to a recent illness, a transplant, high-dose steroids, chemotherapy or a health condition, such as an undiagnosed HIV infection Read more about the causes of bronchitis and the causes of pneumonia. Caring for your symptoms at home Many chest infections aren't serious and get better within a few days or weeks. You won't usually need to see your GP, unless your symptoms suggest you have a more serious infection (see below). While you recover at home, you can improve your symptoms by: getting plenty of rest drinking lots of fluid to prevent dehydration and to loosen the mucus in your lungs, making it easier to cough up treating headaches, fever and aches and pains with painkillers \u2013 such as paracetamol or ibuprofen drinking a warm drink of honey and lemon \u2013 to relieve a sore throat caused by persistent coughing raising your head up with extra pillows while you're sleeping \u2013 to make breathing easier using an air humidifier or inhaling steam from a bowl of hot water \u2013 to ease your cough (hot water shouldn't be used to treat young children with a cough, due to the risk of scalds) stopping smoking Avoid cough medicines, as there's little evidence they work, and coughing actually helps you clear the infection more quickly by getting rid of the phlegm from your lungs. Antibiotics aren't recommended for many chest infections, because they only work if the infection is caused by bacteria, rather than a virus. Your GP will usually only prescribe antibiotics if they think you have pneumonia, or you're at risk of complications such as fluid building up around the lungs (pleurisy). If there's a flu outbreak in your local area and you're at risk of serious infection, your GP may also prescribe antiviral medication. Read more about treating bronchitis and treating pneumonia. When to see a doctor You should see your GP if: you feel very unwell or your symptoms are severe your symptoms are not improving you feel confused, disorientated or drowsy you have chest pain or difficulty breathing you cough up blood or blood-stained phlegm your skin or lips develop a blue tinge (cyanosis) you're pregnant you're 65 or over you're very overweight and have difficulty breathing you think a child under five has a chest infection you have a weakened immune system you have a long-term health condition Your GP should be able to diagnose you based on your symptoms and by listening to your chest using a stethoscope (a medical instrument used to listen to the heart and lungs). In some cases, further tests \u2013 such as a chest X-ray, breathing tests and testing phlegm or blood samples \u2013 may be necessary. Preventing chest infections There are measures you can take to help reduce your risk of developing chest infections and stop them spreading to others. Stop smoking   If you smoke, one of the best things you can do to prevent a chest infection is to stop. Smoking damages your lungs and weakens your defences against infection. Read more information and advice about stopping smoking. Good hygiene   Although chest infections generally aren't as contagious as other common infections, like flu, you can pass them on to others through coughing and sneezing.  Therefore, it's important to cover your mouth when you cough or sneeze, and to wash you hands regularly. Put tissues in the bin immediately.  Read more about preventing germs from spreading. Alcohol and diet Excessive and prolonged alcohol misuse can weaken your lungs' natural defences against infections and make you more vulnerable to chest infections. To keep your risk of alcohol-related harm low, the NHS recommends: not regularly drinking more than 14 units of alcohol a week if you drink as much as 14 units a week, it's best to spread this evenly over three or more days if you're trying to reduce the amount of alcohol you drink, it's a good idea to have several alcohol-free days each week Regular or frequent drinking means drinking alcohol most weeks. The risk to your health is increased by drinking any amount of alcohol on a regular basis. Eating a healthy, balanced diet can help strengthen the immune system, making you less vulnerable to developing chest infections. Read more about healthy eating and tips on cutting down on alcohol. Vaccinations   If you're at an increased risk of chest infections, your GP may recommend being vaccinated against flu and pneumococcal infections (a bacterium that can cause pneumonia). These vaccinations should help to reduce your chances of getting chest infections in the future. Flu and pneumococcal vaccinations are usually recommended for: babies and young children pregnant women (flu jab only) people aged 65 and over people with long-term health conditions or weakened immune systems Read more about the flu vaccine and the pneumococcal vaccine. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/03\/2016 Next review due: 29\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 3834 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2043  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1029  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 235  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 131  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 396  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bronchitis Pneumonia Flu COPD External links Asthma UK British Lung Foundation When to have your vaccinations Find out which vaccinations are routinely offered on the NHS and at what age they are needed Winter health Tips and advice on how to stay healthy and well through the cold, dark days of winter NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chest pain","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/chest-pain","content":"Chest pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chest pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chest-pain Clinical trials Chest pain Introduction  Chest pain can be caused by anything from muscle pain to a heart attack and should never be ignored. When to get help You should call 999 for an ambulance immediately if you develop sudden severe chest pain, particularly if: the pain feels heavy, pressing or tight the pain lasts longer than 15 minutes the pain spreads to other parts of your body, such as your arms, back or jaw you also have other symptoms, such as breathlessness, nausea, sweating, or coughing up blood you are at risk of coronary heart disease \u2013 for example, you smoke, are obese, or have high blood pressure, diabetes or high cholesterol If the discomfort is only minor or has resolved, it may be more appropriate to either see your GP, call NHS 111, or attend a local walk-in centre. Could it be a heart problem? Chest pain isn't always caused by a problem with your heart, but it can sometimes be a symptom of: angina \u2013 where the blood supply to the muscles of the heart is restricted a heart attack \u2013 where the blood supply to part of the heart is suddenly blocked Both of these conditions can cause a dull, heavy or tight pain in the chest that can spread to the arms, neck, jaw or back. They can also cause additional symptoms, such as breathlessness and nausea. The main differences between these conditions is that chest pain caused by angina tends to be triggered by physical activity or emotional stress, and gets better with rest after a few minutes. If you have previously been diagnosed with angina, the pain may also be relieved by your angina medication. Symptoms that last more than 15 minutes, occur at rest, and include sweating and vomiting are more likely to be caused by a heart attack. Dial 999 immediately to request an ambulance if you think you or someone else is having a heart attack, or if you have the symptoms above and haven't been diagnosed with a heart condition. If you have an angina attack and you've previously been diagnosed with the condition, take the medication prescribed for you. A second dose can be taken after five minutes if the first dose is ineffective. If there is no improvement five minutes after the second dose, call 999 and ask for an ambulance. Common causes of chest pain Most chest pain is not heart-related and isn't a sign of a life-threatening problem. Some common causes of chest pain are outlined below. This information should give you an idea of whether these conditions may be causing your chest pain, but you should always seek medical advice to make sure you get a proper diagnosis. Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) is a common condition where acid from the stomach comes up into the oesophagus (gullet). Common symptoms of GORD include: burning chest pain (heartburn) an unpleasant taste in the mouth caused by stomach acid coming back up into your mouth These symptoms usually occur soon after you've eaten and get worse if you bend over or lie down. GORD can often be treated by making lifestyle changes and, if necessary, using medication. Read more about treating GORD. Bone or muscle problems If your chest is painful and tender to touch, it may be caused by a strained muscle in your chest wall. This can be surprisingly painful, but with rest the pain should ease and the muscle will heal in time. If you have pain, swelling and tenderness around your ribs, and the pain is made worse by lying down, breathing deeply, coughing or sneezing, you may have a condition called costochondritis. This is caused by inflammation in the joints between the cartilage that joins the ribs to the breastbone (sternum). The symptoms often improve after a few weeks and may be relieved by painkillers. Anxiety and panic attacks Some episodes of chest pain occur as part of an anxiety or panic attack. In addition to chest pain and overwhelming feelings of anxiety, these attacks can cause symptoms such as heart palpitations, sweating, breathlessness and dizziness. Most panic attacks last for 5 to 20 minutes. In the long-term, you may benefit from psychological therapy and medication, or both. Read more about dealing with panic attacks. Lung conditions If you have sharp chest pain that gets worse when you breathe in and out, and is accompanied by other symptoms such as a cough and breathlessness, it may be caused by a condition affecting the lungs or surrounding tissue, such as: pneumonia \u2013 inflammation of the lungs, usually caused by an infection pleurisy \u2013 inflammation of the membrane surrounding the lungs, also usually caused by an infection Mild cases of pneumonia can usually be treated with antibiotics, rest and fluids. For people with other health conditions, the condition can be severe and they may need to be treated in hospital. Treatment for pleurisy will depend on the underlying cause. Pleurisy caused by a viral infection will often resolve without needing treatment, whereas pleurisy caused by a bacterial infection will usually need to be treated with antibiotics. Again, people who are frail or already in poor health may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment. Other possible causes There are many other potential causes of chest pain, including: shingles \u2013 a viral infection of a nerve and the area of skin around it, which causes a painful rash that develops into itchy blisters mastitis \u2013 pain and swelling of the breast, which is usually caused by an infection, most commonly during breastfeeding acute cholecystitis \u2013 inflammation of the gallbladder, which can cause a sudden sharp pain in the upper right side of your tummy that spreads towards your right shoulder stomach ulcers \u2013 a break in the lining of the stomach, which can cause a burning or gnawing pain in your tummy a pulmonary embolism \u2013 a blockage in the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the lungs, which can cause sharp, stabbing chest pain that may be worse when you breathe in, as well as breathlessness, a cough and dizziness pericarditis \u2013 inflammation of the sac surrounding your heart, which can cause a sudden, sharp and stabbing pain in your chest, or more of a dull ache; the pain usually worsens when lying down Some of these conditions can be very serious. Make sure you seek medical advice so you can be correctly diagnosed and treated. Heart attack Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A consultant cardiologist explains what a heart attack is, the symptoms, surgical treatments and why it's important for coronary heart disease patients to reduce their risk factors. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 01\/12\/2014 Next review due: 01\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1448 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 703  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 385  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 113  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 191  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Angina Find accident & emergency services Heart attack External links National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): chest pain Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chiari malformation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/chiari-malformation","content":"Chiari malformation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chiari malformation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chiari malformation   A Chiari malformation, previously called an Arnold-Chiari malformation, is where the lower part of the brain pushes down into the spinal canal. There are four main types, but type 1, called Chiari I, is the most common. In someone with Chiari I, the lowest part of the back of the brain extends into the spinal canal. This can put pressure on the brainstem, spinal cord, and obstruct the flow of fluid. This page focuses on Chiari I malformations. Is it serious? Symptoms Treatments Causes Are Chiari I malformations serious? The severity of Chiari malformations can vary from person to person, but generally: Chiari I malformations aren't considered life-threatening some people experience painful headaches, movement problems and other unpleasant symptoms (see below), but many people won't have any symptoms  there's a chance of developing syringomyelia (where a fluid-filled cavity called a syrinx develops in the spinal cord), which can damage the spinal cord if not treated promptly surgery can usually stop the symptoms getting worse and can sometimes improve them, although some problems may remain Talk to your doctor about what the condition means, what the implications may be for your health and what treatment you may need. Symptoms of Chiari I malformations Many people with a Chiari I malformation will not have any symptoms. Sometimes they're only found after an (MRI) scan of the brain is carried out for another reason. If symptoms do develop, they can include: headaches \u2013 these are usually felt at the back of the head and may be brought on or made worse by coughing, straining, sneezing or bending over neck pain dizziness and balance problems muscle weakness numbness or tingling in the arms or legs blurred vision, double vision and sensitivity to light swallowing problems hearing loss and tinnitus feeling and being sick difficulty sleeping (insomnia) and depression If you develop syringomyelia, you may also experience problems using your hands, difficulty walking, pain, and problems with bladder or bowel control. If you've been diagnosed with a Chiari malformation, you should contact your doctor for advice if you develop any new symptoms or your symptoms worsen. Treatments for Chiari I malformations Treatment for Chiari I malformation depends on whether you have any symptoms and how severe they are. You might not need any treatment if you don't have any symptoms. Painkillers can help relieve any headaches and neck pain. If your headaches are severe or you have problems caused by the pressure on your spinal cord (such as movement difficulties), surgery may be recommended. Surgery The main operation for Chiari malformation is called decompression surgery. Under general anaesthetic a cut is made at the back of your head and the surgeon removes a small piece of bone from the base of your skull. They may also remove a small piece of bone from the top of your spine. This will help reduce the pressure on your brain and allow the fluid in and around your brain and spinal cord to flow normally. Read an NHS leaflet about decompression for Chiari malformation (PDF, 111kb). Other procedures that may be necessary include: Endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) \u2013 a small hole is made in the wall of one of the cavities of the brain, releasing trapped fluid. See treating hydrocephalus for more information. Ventriculoperitoneal shunting \u2013 a small hole is drilled into the skull and a thin tube called a catheter is passed into the brain cavity to drain trapped fluid and relieve the pressure. See treating hydrocephalus for more information. Untethering \u2013 some children with a type 1 Chiari malformation have a tethered spinal cord, which means it is abnormally attached within the spine. Untethering involves separating the spinal cord and releasing tension in the spine. Read an NHS leaflet on tethered spinal cord (PDF, 193kb). Spinal fixation \u2013 some people with Chiari I will have a hypermobility syndrome, such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and may require surgery to stabilise their spine. The aim of surgery is to stop existing symptoms getting any worse. Some people also experience an improvement in their symptoms, particularly their headaches. However, surgery sometimes results in no improvement or symptoms getting worse. There's also a small risk of serious complications, such as paralysis or a stroke. Talk to your surgeon about the different surgical options and what the benefits and risks of each are. Causes of Chiari I malformations The exact cause of Chiari I malformations is unknown. It tends to be present from birth, but is normally only found in adulthood when symptoms develop or when an MRI scan is done. Many cases are thought to be the result of part of the skull not being large enough for the brain. Chiari I malformations can also develop in people with a tethered spinal cord, a build-up of fluid on the brain (hydrocephalus), and some types of brain tumour. Chiari malformations can sometimes run in families. It's possible that some children born with it may have inherited a faulty gene that caused problems with their skull development. But the risk of passing a Chiari malformation on to your child is very small. And remember: even if your children do inherit it, they may not experience symptoms. Information about you If you have been affected by a Chiari malformation, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 01\/07\/2016 Next review due: 01\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 367 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 166  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Headaches Hydrocephalus External links Ann Conroy Trust Brain and Spine Foundation: Chiari malformations MRI scan An MRI scan uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to produce detailed images of the inside of the body Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chicken skin","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/keratosis-pilaris","content":"Keratosis pilaris - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Keratosis pilaris (\"chicken skin\")  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Keratosis pilaris Introduction  Keratosis pilaris is a common and harmless condition where the skin becomes rough and bumpy, as if covered in permanent goose pimples. There's no cure for keratosis pilaris, but you may be able to improve the rash by using soap-free cleansers, moisturising and gently exfoliating (removing dead skin cells from the surface of the skin). There's no real need to see your GP unless the condition is causing you concern. It usually improves as you get older and sometimes disappears completely in adulthood. This page provides more information on keratosis pilaris and explains what you can do if you have the condition. Where keratosis pilaris occurs Keratosis pilaris most commonly affects the back of the upper arms, and sometimes the buttocks and front of the thighs. Less often, the forearms and upper back may be affected. There are also rare variants of keratosis pilaris that can affect the eyebrows, face and scalp, or the entire body. How it affects the skin The patches of affected skin will be covered in tiny spiky bumps, which may be white, red or skin-coloured. This spotting looks like \"chicken skin\" or permanent goose pimples, and the skin feels rough, like sandpaper. In some people, the skin itches and there may be inflammation and pinkness around the bumps. Keratosis pilaris isn't contagious (it can't be spread from person to person). The skin tends to improve in summer and get worse during winter months or dry conditions. Who is affected Keratosis pilaris is very common, affecting up to one in three people in the UK. It can affect people of all ages, but it's particularly common in: children and adolescents females people with eczema or a condition called ichthyosis (thick, dry scaly skin) people of Celtic origin The condition typically starts during childhood (although it can sometimes occur in babies), and gets worse in adolescence, around puberty. Keratosis pilaris sometimes improves after puberty, and may even disappear in adulthood, although many adults still have the condition in their 40s and 50s. It's uncommon in elderly people. What causes keratosis pilaris? Keratosis pilaris runs in families and is inherited from your parents. If one parent has the condition, there's a one in two chance that any children they have will also inherit it. Keratosis pilaris occurs when too much keratin builds up in the skin's hair follicles. Keratin is a protein found in the tough outer layer of skin, which causes the surface of the skin to thicken (hence the name \"keratosis\"). The excess keratin blocks the hair follicles with plugs of hard, rough skin. The tiny plugs widen the pores, giving the skin a spotty appearance. It's often associated with other dry skin conditions, such as eczema and ichthyosis, which make the rash worse. Treating keratosis pilaris There's little that can be done to treat keratosis pilaris, and it often gets better on its own without treatment. However, if it's bothering you, the following measures may help improve your rash: Use non-soap cleansers rather than soap \u2013 ordinary soap may dry your skin out and make the condition worse. Moisturise your skin when it's dry \u2013 your GP or pharmacist can recommend a suitable cream. However, moisturisers and emollients only reduce the dryness of your skin and won't cure the rash. Creams containing salicylic acid, lactic acid or urea are thought to be the most effective. Gently rub the skin with an exfoliating foam pad or pumice stone to exfoliate the rough skin \u2013 be careful not to scrub too hard and rub off layers of skin. Take lukewarm showers rather than hot baths. You can also ask your GP about \"off-label\" treatments that may help. These are products that haven't been officially approved and licensed for treating keratosis pilaris, but are sometimes used because they've helped people in the past. Examples include: creams containing retinol (which is derived from vitamin A) chemical peels microdermabrasion \u2013 a cosmetic exfoliation treatment, which is sometimes offered in health spas There's no strong evidence to suggest that these therapies are effective treatments for keratosis pilaris. You may also have to pay for some of them privately. Page last reviewed: 15\/04\/2015 Next review due: 15\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 426 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 257  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Eczema Emollients Ichthyosis Skin health External links The British Association of Dermatologists Community content from HealthUnlocked Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chickenpox","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chickenpox","content":"Chickenpox - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chickenpox  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chickenpox Clinical trials Chickenpox Chickenpox Symptoms Chickenpox Causes Chickenpox Diagnosis Chickenpox Treatment Chickenpox Complications Chickenpox Prevention Introduction  Chickenpox is a mild and common childhood illness that most children catch at some point. It causes a rash of red, itchy spots that turn into fluid-filled blisters. They then crust over to form scabs, which eventually drop off. Some children have only a few spots, but other children can have spots that cover their entire body. These are most likely to appear on the face, ears and scalp, under the arms, on the chest and belly, and on the arms and legs. Read more about the symptoms of chickenpox and watch a slideshow of common childhood conditions to help you recognise if your child has it. Chickenpox (known medically as varicella) is caused by a virus called the varicella-zoster virus. It's spread quickly and easily from someone who is infected. Read more about the causes of chickenpox. Chickenpox is most common in children under the age of 10. In fact, chickenpox is so common in childhood that over 90% of adults are immune to the condition because they've had it before. Children usually catch chickenpox in winter and spring, particularly between March and May. What to do To prevent spreading the infection, keep children off nursery or school until all their spots have crusted over. Chickenpox is infectious from one to two days before the rash starts, until all the blisters have crusted over (usually five to six days after the start of the rash). If your child has chickenpox, try to keep them away from public areas to avoid contact with people who may not have had it, especially people who are at risk of serious problems, such as newborn babies, pregnant women and anyone with a weakened immune system (for example, people having cancer treatment or taking steroid tablets). Read more about what you need to do to stop chickenpox spreading. Chickenpox treatment Chickenpox in children is considered a mild illness, but your child will probably feel pretty miserable and irritable while they have it. Your child may have a fever for the first few days of the illness. The spots can be incredibly itchy. There is no specific treatment for chickenpox, but there are pharmacy remedies that can alleviate symptoms. These include paracetamol to relieve fever, and calamine lotion and cooling gels to ease itching. In most children, the blisters crust up and fall off naturally within one to two weeks. Read more about chickenpox treatments. When to see a doctor For most children, chickenpox is a mild illness that gets better on its own. However, some children can become more seriously ill with chickenpox and need to see a doctor. Contact your GP straight away if your child develops any abnormal symptoms, such as: if the blisters on their skin become infected  if your child has a pain in their chest or has difficulty breathing Chickenpox in adults Chickenpox may be a childhood illness, but adults can get it too. Chickenpox tends to be more severe in adults than children, and adults have a higher risk of developing complications. Adults with chickenpox should stay off work until all the spots have crusted over. They should seek medical advice if they develop any abnormal symptoms, such as infected blisters. Adults with chickenpox may benefit from taking antiviral medicine if treatment is started early in the course of the illness. Read more about antivirals in the treatment of chickenpox. Who's at special risk? Some children and adults are at special risk of serious problems if they catch chickenpox. They include: pregnant women newborn babies people with a weakened immune system These people should seek medical advice as soon as they are exposed to the chickenpox virus or they develop chickenpox symptoms. They may need a blood test to check if they are protected from (immune to) chickenpox. Read more about immunity testing and the diagnosis of chickenpox in people at special risk. Chickenpox in pregnancy Chickenpox occurs in approximately 3 in every 1,000 pregnancies. It can cause serious complications for both the pregnant woman and her baby. See complications of chickenpox for further information on what to do if you are exposed to chickenpox during pregnancy. Chickenpox and shingles Once you have had chickenpox, you usually develop antibodies to the infection and become immune to catching it again. However, the virus that causes chickenpox, the varicella-zoster virus, remains inactive (dormant) in your body's nerve tissues and can return later in life as an illness called shingles. It's possible to catch chickenpox from someone with shingles, but not the other way around. Read more about shingles. Is there a vaccine against chickenpox? There is a chickenpox vaccine, but it is not part of the routine childhood vaccination schedule. The vaccine is only offered to children and adults who are particularly vulnerable to chickenpox complications. The recommended two doses of the vaccine is estimated to offer 98% protection from chickenpox in children and 75% protection in adolescents and adults. So it may be possible to develop the infection after vaccination. Similarly, there is a chance that someone who has received the vaccine could develop chickenpox after coming in close contact with a person who has shingles. Read more about the chickenpox vaccine and why children in the UK aren't routinely vaccinated against chickenpox. Common questions about chickenpox answered How do you catch chickenpox? How are chickenpox and shingles connected? What are the risks of chickenpox during pregnancy? How rare is chickenpox during pregnancy? What should I do if I'm pregnant and I've been near someone with chickenpox? Who can have the chickenpox vaccination? Can I get chickenpox more than once? Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/07\/2014 Next review due: 28\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1196 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 617  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 251  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 188  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chickenpox vaccine Treating a high temperature in children How to spot a seriously ill child Childhood fever Infectious childhood illnesses Shingles External links Public Health England: chickenpox Kids: coughs, colds and ear infections What to do when your child has a minor illness such as a cough, cold, sore throat or ear infection Taking your baby's temperature Find out about what to do if you're worried your baby has a fever NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chickenpox (varicella) vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/chickenpox-vaccine.aspx","content":"Chickenpox (varicella) vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Chickenpox vaccine The chickenpox vaccine protects against the varicella zoster virus that causes chickenpox. The chickenpox vaccine is not part of the routine childhood vaccination schedule. It is currently only offered on the NHS to people who are in close contact with someone who is particularly vulnerable to chickenpox or its complications. There are two chickenpox vaccines currently available. The brand names of the chickenpox vaccine are VARIVAX and VARILRIX. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for VARIVAX. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for VARILRIX Who is at risk from chickenpox? Chickenpox is a common childhood infection. Usually, it's mild and complications are rare. Almost all children develop immunity to chickenpox after infection, so most only catch it once. The disease can be more severe in adults. Certain groups of people, however, are at greater risk of serious complications from chickenpox. These include: people who have weakened immune systems through illnesses such as HIV or treatments like chemotherapy pregnant women \u2013 chickenpox can be very serious for an unborn baby when a pregnant woman catches the infection. It can cause a range of serious birth defects, as well as severe disease in the baby when it is born. Read more about what to do if you catch or are exposed to chickenpox in pregnancy Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? It is recommended for certain individuals, such as: non-immune healthcare workers people who come into close contact with someone who has a weakened immune system This is to lower the chances of infecting people at risk. For example, if you're having chemotherapy treatment, it's advisable that non-immune children close to you are given the chickenpox vaccine. The vaccine would also be recommended if you were about to start work in a radiotherapy department and had not had chickenpox before. Read more about who should have the chickenpox vaccine. How the chickenpox vaccine works The chickenpox vaccine is a live vaccine and contains a small amount of weakened chickenpox-causing virus. The vaccine stimulates your immune system to produce antibodies that will help protect against chickenpox. Read more about live vaccines. Read more about chickenpox vaccine side effects. How is the chickenpox vaccine given? The vaccine is given as two separate injections, usually into the upper arm, four to eight weeks apart. How effective is the chickenpox vaccine? It's been shown that 9 out of 10 children vaccinated with a single dose will develop immunity against chickenpox. Two doses are recommended, as this gives an even better immune response. The vaccination is not quite as effective after childhood. It's estimated that three-quarters of teenagers and adults who are vaccinated will become immune to chickenpox. If you are worried your child has a rash that could be chickenpox, take a look at this childhood rashes slideshow to see if the rash is a typical symptom of chickenpox or another childhood condition. Read answers to common questions about the chickenpox vaccine. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the baby rashes information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/baby_rashes_a_visual_guide.html Page last reviewed: 31\/03\/2016 Next review due: 31\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 57 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Chickenpox Chickenpox is a mild and common illness that most children catch at some point NHS Choices links NHS vaccination schedule Shingles External links Green Book: chickenpox vaccination  healthtalk.org: real immunisation stories Find your local GP Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Skin rashes in babies Most rashes in babies are harmless and clear on their own. Find out about the common causes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chilblains","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/chilblains","content":"Chilblains - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chilblains  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview chilblains Clinical trials Chilblains Overview  Chilblains are small, itchy swellings on the skin that occur as a reaction to cold temperatures. They most often affect the body's extremities, such as the toes, fingers, heels, ears and nose. Chilblains can be uncomfortable but rarely cause any permanent damage. They normally heal within a few weeks if further exposure to the cold is avoided. Signs and symptoms of chilblains Chilblains usually develop several hours after exposure to the cold. They typically cause a burning and itching sensation in the affected areas, which can become more intense if you go into a warm room. The affected skin may also swell and turn red or dark blue. In severe cases, the surface of the skin may break and sores or blisters can develop.  It's important not to scratch the skin as it can break easily and become infected. When to seek medical advice Most people don't need to seek medical advice if they have chilblains as they usually heal within a few weeks and don't cause any permanent problems. However, see your GP or chiropodist for advice if you have: severe or recurring chilblains chilblains that don't improve within a few weeks You should also seek medical advice if you think your skin may have become infected. Signs of infection include: swelling and pus forming in the affected area feeling generally unwell a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above swollen glands What causes chilblains? Chilblains are the result of an abnormal reaction to the cold. They are common in the UK because damp, cold weather is usual in the winter. Some people develop chilblains every winter that last for several months. When the skin is cold, blood vessels near its surface get narrower. If the skin is then exposed to heat, the blood vessels become wider. If this happens too quickly, blood vessels near the surface of the skin can't always handle the increased blood flow. This can cause blood to leak into the surrounding tissue, which may cause the swelling and itchiness associated with chilblains. Some people are more at risk of chilblains than others. This includes people with: poor circulation a family history of chilblains regular exposure to cold, damp or draughty conditions a poor diet or low body weight lupus \u2013 a long-term condition that causes swelling in the body's tissues Raynaud's phenomenon \u2013 a common condition that affects the blood supply to certain parts of the body, usually the fingers and toes People who smoke are more at risk of chilblains as nicotine constricts blood vessels. Chilblains can also occur on areas of the feet that are exposed to pressure, such as a bunion or a toe that's squeezed by tight shoes. Treating chilblains Chilblains often get better on their own without treatment after a week or two. It may help to use a soothing lotion, such as calamine or witch hazel, to relieve itching. Your pharmacist may also be able to recommend a suitable product. If your chilblains are severe and keep returning, speak to your GP. They may recommend taking a daily tablet or capsule of a medication called nifedipine. This works by relaxing the blood vessels, improving your circulation.  Nifedipine can be used to help existing chilblains heal or can be taken during the winter to stop them developing. Preventing chilblains If you're susceptible to chilblains, you can reduce your risk of developing them by: limiting your exposure to the cold looking after your feet taking steps to improve your circulation If your skin gets cold, it's important to warm it up gradually. Heating the skin too quickly, for example by placing your feet in hot water or near a heater, is one of the main causes of chilblains. The following advice should help: stop smoking \u2013 nicotine causes the blood vessels to constrict, which can make chilblains worse keep active \u2013 this helps improve your circulation wear warm clothes and insulate your hands, feet and legs \u2013 wearing long johns, long boots, tights, leg warmers or long socks will help, and it's a good idea to wear a clean pair of socks if you get cold feet in bed avoid tight shoes and boots \u2013 these can restrict the circulation to your toes and feet moisturise your feet regularly \u2013 this stops them drying out and the skin cracking eat at least one hot meal during the day \u2013 this will help warm your whole body, particularly in cold weather warm your shoes on the radiator before you put them on \u2013 make sure damp shoes are dry before you wear them; if your feet are already cold, make sure your shoes aren't too hot to avoid causing chilblains warm your hands before going outdoors \u2013 soak them in warm water for several minutes and dry thoroughly, and wear cotton-lined waterproof gloves if necessary; if your hands are already cold, make sure not to warm them up too quickly to avoid causing chilblains keep your house well heated \u2013 try to keep one room in the house warm and avoid drafts if you are diabetic, regularly check your feet (or ask someone else to do this) \u2013 people with diabetes may not be able to feel their feet and could have infected chilblains without realising it Read more about:  how to keep warm in very cold weather looking after your health in winter Complications of chilblains If you have severe or recurring chilblains, there's a small risk of further problems developing, such as: infection from blistered or scratched skin ulcers forming on the skin permanent discolouration of the skin scarring of the skin It's often possible to avoid these complications by: not scratching or rubbing the affected areas of skin not directly overheating the chilblains (by using hot water, for example) You can also help reduce your risk of infection by cleaning any breaks in your skin with antiseptic and covering the area with an antiseptic dressing. The dressing should be changed every other day until the skin heals.  If the skin does become infected, antibiotics may be prescribed to treat the infection. Page last reviewed: 01\/09\/2015 Next review due: 01\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 832 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 435  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 217  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 98  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the foot problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/foot_problems_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Raynaud's phenomenon Winter health External links Circulation Foundation College of Podiatry Keep warm, keep well How to keep your home and family warm and healthy over the winter with the Keep warm, keep well campaign Winter health Tips and advice on how to stay healthy and well through the cold, dark days of winter NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Child health","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/LiveWell\/Childhealth6-15\/Pages\/Childhealth615home.aspx","content":"Child health 6-15 - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Child health 6-15 Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Get healthy as a family Any changes you make to your child\u2019s diet and lifestyle are much more likely to be accepted if they involve the whole family. The National Child Measurement Programme Healthy-weight children: advice for parents How to keep children at a healthy weight, including mealtime and physical activity tips, plus advice on sleep, screen-time and family outings. What can I do if my child is overweight? Practical advice for parents of overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and physical activity. What can I do if my child is very overweight? Healthy eating and exercise tips, plus advice on calories, portion control and weight management clubs. How to involve your child in being healthy Children are more likely to keep to a healthy lifestyle if it's fun. Ideas for helping them choose and prepare meals and pick activities they enjoy. 10 ways to get active with your kids Having trouble getting your child away from the TV? Try these tips to get them out and active. Physical activity guidelines for children and young people Guidelines for young people aged 5 to 18, for general health and fitness. Children's headaches Advice for parents on how to recognise the symptoms and causes of children's headaches and how to treat them. Healthy lunchbox treats Make sure your child's lunchbox provides a healthy nutritionally balanced lunch. Underweight children aged 6-12 Maintaining a healthy weight is vital for children. If your child is aged 6-12 years old and is underweight, a good diet is key. Coping with your teenager Information and advice for parents on coping with a teenager, including dealing with difficult behaviour. Sweets, fizzy drinks and bottles 10 tips for parents on keeping kids' teeth healthy, including cutting out sugary drinks and snacks. Learning disabilities: coping with a diagnosis How a learning disability is diagnosed, and sources of support if you are told your child has one. Beat school exam stress Get tips to help your child beat stress, and watch a video of pupils talking about exams. 'My daughter and Down's syndrome' Monica Rivers describes family life with her six-year-old daughter Ayesha, who has Down's syndrome. Long-term health conditions at school If your child has a long-term health condition, they may need support at school. Find out what to expect. Worried about your teenager? Advice and information for parents who may be worried about their teenage child. 5 A DAY and your family Cooking for a family, including a fussy eater or two? These tips will help your kids get their 5 A DAY. Boost your child's bone health Bone-boosting diet and exercise tips to help your child build strong, healthy bones for life. Protect them from child abuse The majority of adults would never harm a child. But it's important to keep them safe and be aware of the possible dangers. How much sleep do kids need? Find out how much sleep your child needs, from newborns to 16 year olds. Summer safety for younger children Summer holidays are great fun for children, but can bring risks. Here are some tips for keeping them safe. Free family activities Need ways to keep the kids occupied this summer? Suggestions for healthy activities that cost little or nothing. Talking to children about feelings If you're worried about a child you think has a problem, getting them to talk about it can really help. Bullying: advice for parents Bullying is a big concern for many parents and carers. Find out what you can do to help your child. Children and bereavement Where to get support if a child has lost a loved one or has a loved one who is dying. Starting periods Tips for parents on when to talk to girls (and boys) about periods, and what to tell them. Talking about drugs with your child Tips to help you talk openly about drugs with your child. Talking to your kids about cancer Talking to children about your cancer may be difficult, but these tips can make it easier for you and them. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler talks about her experience of being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. How TVs, phones and screens spoil kids' sleep Keep your child's bedroom free from electronic distractions and help them sleep better. How to spot child sexual exploitation Ways to spot if a child has been sexually exploited and what to do. Is my child too ill for school? All children miss school occasionally due to illness. But not every minor health issue has to mean a day off. Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Sports and Fitness Dentist Parenting information and support services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html Children's sleep Get advice on dealing with common sleep problems affecting babies, children and teenagers Vegetarian and vegan children How to give vegetarian or vegan children all the energy and nutrients they need, including protein, calcium, vitamin B12 and omega-3 When to vaccinate your child Which vaccines your child needs and at what age they should have them Adoption and fostering Find out about adopting or fostering a child from care, the health issues and post-adoption support and services HPV vaccination: parents' rights Find out what you and your daughter's rights are when it comes to cervical cancer vaccination Puberty Articles about puberty, including the stages of puberty in boys and girls, tips to help parents prepare their children and common Q&As Your child at school Find out how you can work with your child's school to help keep them healthy and happy Learning disability Find out how to support someone with a learning disability, including their education and coping with challenging behaviour 5 A DAY Whether you're cooking for a family or eating on the run, our tips and recipes can help you get your 5 A DAY NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Child health checks","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/routine-checks-vaccinations.aspx","content":"Your baby's health and development reviews - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your baby's health and development reviews Your baby will have regular health and development reviews during their early years. These are to make sure they stay healthy and are developing normally. The reviews will usually be done by your health visitor or a member of the health visiting team. The team works closely with your GP and the staff at your local children's centre. Reviews may be done in your home or at the GP surgery, well baby clinic, or children's centre. Appointments can be arranged so both you and your partner are there. The reviews are an opportunity for you both to ask questions and discuss any concerns you may have. The personal child health record (red book) Shortly before or after your baby is born, you'll be given a personal child health record (PCHR). This usually has a red cover and is often called the \"red book\". It's a handy way for you to keep track of your child's health and progress, and can be shared with their health professionals. It's a good idea to take your baby's red book with you every time you visit the baby clinic, GP, or hospital. Your baby's health professionals will use it to record your child's weight and height, vaccinations, and other important health information. Find out more about your baby's vaccinations. You can also add information to the red book yourself. You may want to record any illnesses or accidents your baby has, and details of any medicines they take. You'll find it helpful to keep the developmental milestones section of the red book up-to-date and fill in the relevant questionnaires before each routine review. An electronic version of the red book is available in some areas. Find out more about the eRedbook. What happens at your baby's reviews During your baby's reviews, your health visitor will discuss your baby's progress and ask if you have any concerns. If your baby was born prematurely, their developmental age will be calculated from your original due date, not from the actual date they were born, until they are two years old. Your baby will be weighed regularly, but health professionals will want to avoid weighing them too often. This is because babies' weight gain can vary from week to week. Leaving a few weeks between weigh-ins gives a clearer idea of their progress. See how often your baby will be weighed. When your baby will have their reviews Your baby will usually have reviews at the ages outlined below. If you have any concerns at other times, contact your health visitor or GP, or go to your local baby clinic. Shortly after birth Your baby will be weighed at birth and again during their first week. They will also have a thorough physical examination within 72 hours of being born. A medical professional will usually check your baby's eyes, heart, hips, and \u2013 for baby boys \u2013 testes. Read more about the newborn physical examination. At five to eight days, but ideally at five days, your baby will have a blood spot (heel prick) test, which screens for a number of rare diseases, including cystic fibrosis and sickle cell disease. This is usually done by the midwife. See more about the blood spot (heel prick) test. Your baby will have a hearing test soon after birth. If you have your baby in hospital, this may be done before you leave. Otherwise, it will be done some time in the first few weeks at the hearing centre in your local hospital. See what the newborn hearing test involves. Your midwife and health visitor will also support you with breastfeeding, caring for your new baby, and adjusting to life as new parents. One to two weeks Your health visitor will carry out a new baby review with you and your partner within 10 to 14 days of the birth. They'll work with you on becoming parents and how to keep your baby safe and healthy. You and your partner will also be offered support with breastfeeding if you need it. Six to eight weeks Your baby will be invited for a thorough physical examination. This is usually done by your GP. Your baby's eyes, heart, hips, and \u2013 for boys \u2013 testicles will be checked. They will also have their weight, length, and head circumference measured. Your GP or health visitor will also discuss your baby's vaccinations with you. In the first year these are offered from 8, 12, and 16 weeks. The health visitor will also talk to you about your emotional wellbeing since the birth of your baby. See more information about the NHS vaccination schedule. Nine months to one year During this time, your baby should be offered another review looking at several areas, including language and learning, safety, diet, and behaviour. This is usually done by the health visitor or a member of the health visiting team, and is an opportunity for you and your partner to discuss any concerns you may have. You may be asked to fill in a short questionnaire to help your health visitor understand how your baby is developing. One to three years At one year of age your baby will have their next set of routine vaccinations. Between the ages of two and six, including school years 1 and 2, they will also be offered annual flu vaccinations, which are given as a nasal spray. At two to two-and-a-half years they will have another health and development review. This is usually done by a nursery nurse or the health visitor, and may happen at your home, baby clinic, the children's centre, or your child's nursery if they're attending one. They'll encourage you to talk about your child's progress and will help you with any concerns. You may be asked to fill in a short questionnaire about your baby's development. It's best if both you and your partner are there. If your child attends an early years setting, such as a nursery or childminder, the review may be linked to your child's early years progress check at age two. The review will cover: general development, including movement, speech, social skills and behaviour, and hearing and vision growth, healthy eating, and keeping active managing behaviour and encouraging good sleeping habits tooth brushing and going to the dentist  keeping your child safe vaccinations Three years onwards Your child will have another vaccination \u2013 sometimes called the preschool booster \u2013 at the age of three years, four months. They will also have annual flu vaccinations up to the age of six. Once your child reaches school age, the school nursing team and school staff will help support their health and development. They will work with you to make sure your child is offered the right vaccinations and health reviews. The school nursing team can also give you advice and support on all aspects of your child's health and wellbeing, including emotional and social issues. Page last reviewed: 09\/02\/2015 Next review due: 09\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 45 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Men B vaccine A new Men B vaccine called Bexsero is available on the NHS for babies aged 8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year old Help for sore or cracked nipples With the right help and support, sore or cracked nipples while breastfeeding can often be sorted out External links Fatherhood Institute: advice for dads Institute of Health Visiting: tips for parents The Lullaby Trust: safer sleep for babies Related articles Coughs, colds and ear infections Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby Your baby's first aid kit Reflux in babies Babies often bring up milk during or shortly after feeding. This is known as \"posseting\", or \"reflux\" Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Baby and toddler safety How to keep your baby or toddler safe, including preventing falls, burns and drowning NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Children's medicines","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/childrens-medicines.aspx","content":"Medicines for babies and children - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Medicines for babies and children Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Should my doctor give my child antibiotics? (from 6 months) Media last reviewed: 01\/05\/2015 Next review due: 01\/05\/2017 Medicines aren't always needed for childhood illnesses. Most illnesses get better by themselves, and make your child stronger and able to resist similar illnesses in the future. Painkillers for children Paracetamol and ibuprofen are often used to relieve the discomfort caused by a high temperature. Some children, such as those with asthma, may not be able to take ibuprofen, so check with your pharmacist, GP or health visitor. Both paracetamol and ibuprofen are safe and effective. Always have one or both stored in a safe place at home. Don't give aspirin to children under 16 unless it's specifically prescribed by a doctor. It has been linked with a rare but dangerous illness called Reye's syndrome. If you're breastfeeding, ask your health visitor, midwife or GP for advice before taking aspirin. Paracetamol for children Paracetamol can be given to children over two months old for pain and fever. Make sure you've got the right strength for your child. Overdosing is dangerous. Check with your pharmacist when you buy it, and read the label carefully. Ibuprofen for children Ibuprofen can be given for pain and fever in children of three months and over who weigh more than 5kg (11lbs). Check the correct dose for your child's age. Avoid ibuprofen if your child has asthma, unless advised by your GP. Antibiotics for children Children don't often need antibiotics. Most childhood infections are caused by viruses, and antibiotics only treat illnesses caused by bacteria, not viruses. If you're offered a prescription, especially an antibiotic, talk to your GP about why it's needed, how it will help, and whether there are any alternatives. Ask about any possible side effects \u2013 for example, whether it will make your child sleepy or irritable. If your child is prescribed antibiotics, always finish the whole course to make sure all the bacteria are killed off. Your child may seem better after two or three days, but if the course is five days, they must carry on taking the medicine. The illness is more likely to return if you don't finish all the antibiotics. Child medicine dosages Make sure you know how much and how often to give a medicine. Writing it in your child's Personal Child Health Record (PCHR, or red book) may help you remember. See Your baby's health and development reviews for more information on the red book. If in doubt, check with your pharmacist or GP. Never give the medicine more frequently than recommended by your GP or pharmacist. With liquids, always measure out the right dose for your child's age. The instructions will be on the bottle. Sometimes liquid medicine may have to be given using a special spoon or liquid medicine measure. This allows you to give small doses of medicine more accurately. Never use a kitchen teaspoon, as they vary in size. Ask your pharmacist or health visitor to explain how a measure should be used. Always read the manufacturer's instructions supplied with the measure, and always give the exact dose stated on the medicine bottle. If in doubt, ask the pharmacist for help. If you buy medicines at the pharmacy: Always tell the pharmacist how old your child is. Some medicines are for adult use only. Always follow the instructions on the label or ask the pharmacist if you're unsure. Ask for sugar-free medicines if they're available. Look for the date stamp. Don't use out-of-date medicines. If you have any out-of-date medicines at home, take them back to the pharmacy for safe disposal. Only give your child medicine given to you by your GP, pharmacist or usual healthcare professional. Never use medicines prescribed for anyone else. Keep all medicines out of your child's reach and out of sight, if possible. The kitchen is a good place to keep medicines as it's easy for you to keep an eye on them there. Put them in a place where they won't get warm. Children and side effects from medicine If you think your child is reacting badly to a medicine \u2013 for example, with a rash or diarrhoea \u2013 stop giving it to them and speak to a health professional. If you're worried that a symptom may be a side effect of a medicine: read the patient information leaflet supplied with the medicine \u2013 this lists the known side effects and advises you what to do call NHS 111, or speak to a pharmacist or your GP or practice nurse report the side effect through the Yellow Card Scheme \u2013 the scheme is run by the UK medicines watchdog, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA); Yellow Card reports are used as an early warning system to collect information on side effects and take necessary action to protect the public if there is a problem Keep a note of the medicine's name in your child's red book for future reference. Can you get over-the-counter children's medicines for free? Some pharmacies run what's known as a minor ailment scheme for specific ailments, such as coughs and colds and diarrhoea and vomiting. When pharmacies provide medicines as part of a minor ailment scheme, you get the medicines on the NHS. You won't pay a prescription charge for children under 16. Not all pharmacies offer a minor ailment scheme and the ailments covered by the scheme vary from area to area. Read more about the minor ailments scheme. Page last reviewed: 01\/09\/2015 Next review due: 01\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 36 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles  Common childhood illnesses How do I report a side effect from a medicine? If your child has to go into hospital Pharmacy and medicines  When to have your vaccinations Find out which vaccinations are routinely offered on the NHS and at what age they are needed Roseola Most children will have been infected with roseola by the time they enter nursery school. They'll usually fight off the virus and recover fully within a week Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Overweight children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/childhealth6-15\/Pages\/child-health-measurement-programme-overweight-advice.aspx","content":"Overweight children: advice for parents - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories What can I do if my child is overweight? Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus If your child is overweight, there's lots you can do to help them become a healthy weight as they grow. No diets! Don\u2019t be tempted to put your child on a weight-loss diet. Forcing an overweight child to go hungry can backfire, making them crave food even more.   Your child's still growing, so try to maintain their weight while they continue to grow in height. This way they will grow taller without necessarily adding pounds, and their weight could move into a healthier range. As a parent, it can sometimes be difficult to tell that your child is overweight. A child may not look particularly heavy to be overweight. And because more children are becoming heavier at a younger age, we've become used to seeing bigger children. Research shows children who achieve a healthy weight tend to be fitter, healthier, better able to learn, and more self-confident. They're also less likely to have low self-esteem or be bullied. And they're much less likely to have health problems in later life. As a parent, there's lots you can do to help your child become a healthier weight. Getting them to be more active and eat well is important. Here's lots of practical advice to help you. If your child has a medical condition, the advice in this article may not be relevant and you should check first with their GP or hospital doctor. Steps for success Weight checks Every so often, check whether your child is moving into a healthy weight range with our Healthy weight calculator. Here are five key ways you can help your child maintain a healthy weight. You can read this whole page or click on the links below to go directly to the topic you want to know about: Be a good role model Encourage 60 minutes of physical activity a day Keep to child-size portions Eat healthy meals, drinks and snacks Less screen time and more sleep! Be a good role model One of the best ways to instil good habits in your child is for you to be a good role model. Children learn by example. One of the most powerful ways to encourage your child to be active and eat well is to do so yourself. Set a good example by going for a walk or bike ride instead of watching TV or surfing the internet. Playing in the park or swimming with your children shows them being active is fun, and it's a great way for you all to spend time together.  Any changes you make to your child's diet and lifestyle are much more likely to be accepted if the changes are small and involve the whole family. Here are 10 ways to get healthy as a family. If you're not sure what activities you'd like to try as a family, use this What's your sport? tool to find out what you're best suited to. Physical activity may be more appealing for your child if you do something as a family. Here are 10 ways to get active with your kids. Get ideas for getting children involved in switching to a healthier lifestyle. Get active Overweight children don't need to do more exercise than slimmer children. Their extra body weight means they will naturally burn more calories for the same activity. All children need about 60 minutes of physical activity a day for good health, but it doesn't need to be all at once. Several short 10-minute or even five-minute bursts of activity throughout the day can be just as good as an hour-long stretch. For younger children, it can take the form of active play, such as ball games, chasing games like \"it\" and \"tag\", riding a scooter, and using playground swings, climbing frames and see-saws. For older children it could include riding a bike, skateboarding, walking to school, skipping, swimming, dancing and martial arts. Walking or cycling short distances instead of using the car or bus is a great way to be active together as a family \u2013 and you'll save money, too. Find out the amount and type of physical activity recommended for under-5s. Find out the amount and type of physical activity recommended for children and young people aged 5 to 18. Join Change4Life for free and your child will get their own personalised activity plan full of good ideas for getting moving. Child-size portions Try to avoid feeding your child oversized portions. There's very little official guidance on precisely how much food children require, so you'll need to use your own judgement. A good rule of thumb is to start meals with small servings and let your child ask for more if they're still hungry. Try not to make your child finish everything on the plate or eat more than they want to. And avoid using adult-size plates for younger children as it encourages them to eat oversized portions. It may also help if you encourage your child to eat slowly and have set mealtimes. You can use mealtimes as an opportunity to catch up on what's happened during the day. Explain to your child how to get the balance of their diet right using the eatwell guide \u2013 it shows how much they should eat from each food group. Read more about what counts as a balanced diet. Knowing the calorie content of foods can be useful \u2013 here's information to help you and your child understand calories. Get ideas for healthy packed lunches. Eat healthy meals Children, just like adults, should aim to eat five or more portions of fruit and vegetables everyday. They're a great source of fibre and vitamins and minerals. Getting 5 A DAY shouldn't be too difficult. Almost all fruit and vegetables count towards your child's 5 A DAY, including fresh, tinned, frozen and dried. Juices, smoothies, beans and pulses also count. Be aware that unsweetened 100% fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies can only ever count as a maximum of one portion of their 5 A DAY. For example, if they have two glasses of fruit juice and a smoothie in one day, that still only counts as one portion.  Their combined total of drinks from fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies should not be more than 150ml a day \u2013 which is a small glass. For example, if they have 150ml of orange juice and 150ml smoothie in one day, they\u2019ll have exceeded the recommendation by 150ml. When fruit is blended or juiced, it releases the sugars which increases the risk of tooth decay so it\u2019s best to drink fruit juice or smoothies at mealtimes. Discourage your child from having sugary or high-fat foods like sweets, cakes, biscuits, some sugary cereals, and sugar-sweetened soft and fizzy drinks. These foods and drinks tend to be high in calories and low in nutrients. Aim for your child to get most of their calories from healthier foods such as fruit and vegetables, and starchy foods such as bread, potatoes, pasta and rice (preferably wholemeal). And switch sweetened soft drinks for water. Fussy eater? Not a problem with these tips to help your kids enjoy their 5 A DAY. Tasty 5 A DAY family-friendly recipes. Find out how many soft or fizzy drinks children can have a day. Find out more about healthy drinks for children. Swap high-fat foods for these healthier alternatives. Try these sugar swaps \u2013 healthier swaps for breakfast, snacks and puddings. Ideas for sugar swaps when you shop. Less screen time and more sleep! Alongside the advice to get them moving more is the need to reduce the time they spend sitting or lying down in the day. Help your children avoid sitting and lying around too much as this makes them more likely to put on weight. Limit the time they spend on inactive pastimes like watching TV, playing video games and playing on electronic devices. There's no hard and fast advice on how much is too much, but experts advise that children should watch no more than two hours of television each day. And remove all screens (including mobile phones) from their bedroom at night. It also helps children stay trim if they sleep well. It's been shown that children who don't have the recommended amount of sleep are more likely to be overweight. The less children sleep, the greater the risk of them becoming obese. Lack of sleep can also affect their mood and behaviour. Find out how much sleep children need according to their age. How screens impair children's sleep. Sleep tips for children. Hidden causes of weight gain. If your child has a medical condition, the advice in this article may not be relevant and you should check with their GP or hospital doctor first. Page last reviewed: 05\/10\/2015 Next review due: 05\/10\/2017 More articles on: Child health 6-15 Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 62 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Exercise for children: football Exercise for children: hiking Exercise for children: kickboxing National Child Measurement Programme External links British Dietetic Association: weight advice for teens Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html Overweight children aged 2-5 Find out how a healthy diet and exercise can help your child reach a healthier weight Very overweight children: advice for parents Practical advice for parents of very overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and suitable physical activity Find the sport that's right for you Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy and baby guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vaccines for kids","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/when-to-get-your-child-vaccinated.aspx","content":"When to get your child vaccinated - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: When to vaccinate your child There's a recommended timetable for routine childhood vaccinations. This timetable has been worked out to give children the best chance of developing immunity against common, but potentially deadly, diseases. When to start childhood vaccinations Routine childhood vaccinations start when a baby is eight weeks old. This is a good age to start vaccinations, because the natural immunity to illness that newborn babies get from their mother is beginning to wear off. If a vaccine is given before eight weeks of age, the baby\u2019s natural immunity to disease may stop it from working. That's why you should ideally have your child vaccinated at the recommended time. Any delay can leave your baby unprotected against illnesses that are often more common and worse in younger children. Vaccinations for premature babies Babies who are born early can have a greater risk of catching infections than babies born on time. This is because their immune systems are less developed and they don\u2019t receive as much natural immunity from their mothers. It\u2019s especially important that premature babies get their vaccines on time, from eight weeks after birth, no matter how premature they are. It may seem very early to give a vaccination to such a tiny baby, but many scientific studies have shown that it\u2019s a good time to give them vaccines. Postponing vaccination until they're older leaves them vulnerable to diseases. If your baby was born very prematurely (before 26 weeks of pregnancy), they may still be in hospital when their first vaccinations are due. In this case, your baby will receive their first vaccines in hospital. Read this NHS leaflet on vaccinations for premature babies (PDF, 221kb). Booster jabs Some vaccines are given more than once. A gap is left between these vaccine doses to make sure that each one has time to work properly. However, the recommended gap is only a minimum. If the gap is longer \u2013 because you missed an appointment, for example \u2013 you don\u2019t have to start the course again. Vaccination timings The NHS childhood vaccination schedule tells you when each routine vaccination should be given. It normally starts when your baby is eight weeks old and is completed by the time they're 18. Other non-routine vaccines may be needed throughout childhood, such as travel vaccines or vaccines for children with certain medical conditions. Page last reviewed: 07\/04\/2016 Next review due: 07\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 36 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Vaccination calendar Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by NHS Choices links Common questions about vaccination External links NHS leaflet: complete immunisation schedule (PDF, 77.6kb) NHS leaflet: pre-school immunisations (PDF, 656kb) healthtalk.org: real life vaccination stories from parents Search for services Find and compare services Services Breasfeeding support services Children's & Adolescent Services Family activities GP Parenting information and support services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Very overweight children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/childhealth6-15\/Pages\/child-health-measurement-programme-very-overweight-advice.aspx","content":"Very overweight children: advice for parents - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories What can I do if my child is very overweight? Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus If your child is very overweight, there's lots you can do to help them become a healthy weight as they grow. Weight checks Every so often, check whether your child is moving into a healthy weight range with our Healthy weight calculator. Very overweight children tend to grow up to be very overweight adults, which can lead to health problems such as type 2 diabetes, heart disease and certain cancers. Research shows children who achieve a healthy weight tend to be fitter, healthier, better able to learn, and are more self-confident. They're also less likely to have low self-esteem and be bullied. As a parent, there's lots you can do to help your child become a healthier weight. Getting them to be more active and eat well is important. Here's practical advice to help you. Listen to your child's concern about their weight. Overweight children often know they have a weight problem, and they need to feel supported and in control of their weight. Let them know that you love them, whatever their weight, and that all you want is for them to be healthy and happy. Steps for success Medical help If your child is very overweight, or if they have other health conditions, it\u2019s a good idea to ask for support. See suggested support networks at the bottom of the page. Here are five key ways to help your child achieve a healthy weight. You can read this whole page or click on the links below to go directly to the topic you want to know about: Be a good role model  Encourage 60 minutes of physical activity a day  Keep to child-size portions  Eat healthy meals, drinks and snacks  Less screen time and more sleep!  If your child has a medical condition, the advice in this article may not be relevant. You should check with their GP or hospital doctor first. Be a good role model One of the best ways to instil good habits in your child is to be a good role model. Children learn by example. One of the most powerful ways to enourage your child to be active and eat well is to do so yourself. Set a good example by going for a walk or bike ride instead of watching TV or surfing the internet. Playing in the park or swimming with your children shows them being active is fun. Any changes you make to your child's diet and lifestyle are much more likely to be accepted if the changes are small and involve the whole family. Here are 10 ways to get healthy as a family. If you're not sure what activities you'd like to try as a family, use this What's your sport? tool to find out what you're best suited to. Get active Very overweight children don't need to do more exercise than slimmer children. Their extra body weight means they will naturally burn more calories for the same activity. All children need about 60 minutes of physical activity a day for good health, but it doesn't need to be all at once. Several short 10-minute or even five-minute bursts of activity throughout the day can be just as good as an hour-long stretch. For younger children it can take the form of active play, such as ball games, chasing games like \"it\" and \"tag\", riding a scooter, and using playground swings, climbing frames and see-saws. For older children it could include riding a bike, skateboarding, walking to school, skipping, swimming, dancing and martial arts. If your child isn't used to being active, encourage them to start with what they can do and build up to 60 minutes a day. They're more likely to stick to their new activity levels if you let them choose the type of activity they're comfortable with. Walking or cycling short distances instead of using the car or bus is a great way to be active together as a family \u2013 and you'll save money, too. Find out the amount and type of physical activity recommended for under-5s. Find out the amount and type of physical activity recommended for children and young people aged 5 to 18. Join Change4Life for free and your child will get their own personalised activity plan full of good ideas for getting moving. Child-size portions Try to avoid feeding your child large portions. A good rule of thumb is to start meals with small servings and let your child ask for more if they're still hungry. Try not to make your child finish everything on the plate or eat more than they want to. And avoid using adult-size plates for younger children as it encourages them to eat oversized portions. Beware of high-calorie foods. Calories are a measure of the energy in food \u2013 knowing how many calories your child consumes each day, and balancing that with the amount of energy they use up in activity, will help them reach and stay at a healthy weight. This article helps you and your child understand calories. Keep track of your child's daily calorie intake with MyFitnessPal's free online calorie counter (also available as an app). Find out how many calories children aged 7 to 10 need and how many calories teenagers need. Explain to your child how to get the balance of their diet right using the eatwell guide \u2013 it shows how much they should eat from each food group. Read more about what counts as a balanced diet. Get ideas for healthy packed lunches. Eat healthy meals Children, just like adults, should aim to eat five or more portions of fruit and vegetables everyday. They're a great source of fibre and vitamins and minerals. Getting 5 A DAY shouldn't be too difficult. Almost all fruit and vegetables count towards your child's 5 A DAY, including fresh, tinned, frozen and dried. Juices, smoothies, beans and pulses also count. Be aware though that unsweetened 100% fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies can only ever count as a maximum of one portion of their 5 A DAY. For example, if they have two glasses of fruit juice and a smoothie in one day, that still only counts as one portion.  Their combined total of drinks from fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies should not be more than 150ml a day \u2013 which is a small glass. For example, if they have 150ml of orange juice and 150ml smoothie in one day, they\u2019ll have exceeded the recommendation by 150ml. When fruit is blended or juiced, it releases the sugars which increases the risk of tooth decay so it\u2019s best to drink fruit juice or smoothies at mealtimes. Discourage your child from having sugary or high-fat foods like sweets, cakes, biscuits, some sugary cereals, and sugar-sweetened soft and fizzy drinks. These foods and drinks tend to be high in calories and low in nutrients. Aim for your child to get most of their calories from healthier foods such as fruit and vegetables, and starchy foods like bread, potatoes, pasta and rice (preferably wholemeal). And switch sweetened drinks for water. Fussy eater? Not a problem with these tips to help your kids enjoy their 5 A DAY. Tasty 5 A DAY family-friendly recipes. Find out more about healthy drinks for children. Swap high-fat foods for these healthier alternatives. Try these sugar swaps \u2013 healthier swaps for breakfast, snacks and puddings. Ideas for sugar swaps when you shop. Less screen time and more sleep! Help your children avoid sitting and lying around too much, as it makes it more likely for them to put on weight. Limit the amount of time your child spends on inactive pastimes such as watching television, playing video games and playing on electronic devices. There's no hard and fast advice on how much is too much, but experts advise children should watch no more than two hours of television each day \u2013 and remove all screens (including mobile phones) from their bedroom at night. It also helps children stay trim if they sleep well. It's been shown that children who don't have the recommended amount of sleep are more likely to be overweight. The less children sleep, the greater the risk of them becoming obese. Lack of sleep can also affect their mood and behaviour. Find out how much sleep children need according to their age. How screens impair children's sleep. Sleep tips for children. Hidden causes of weight gain. Getting support If you've received a letter about your child's weight after they were measured at school, you can use the contact number on the letter to speak to a health worker and get more information about what you can do and what support is available in your area. Your GP or practice nurse can give you further advice. They also may be able to refer you to a local weight management programme for children, such as those run by MEND and More Life.  These programmes are often free to attend through your local health authority, and typically involve a series of weekly group workshop sessions with other parents and their children. You'll learn more about the diet and lifestyle changes that can help your child achieve a healthy weight.  Page last reviewed: 05\/10\/2015 Next review due: 05\/10\/2017 More articles on: Child health 6-15 Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 34 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hidden causes of weight gain How many soft or fizzy drinks can children have each day? External links British Dietetic Association: weight advice for teens Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html 'I weighed 70kg at 11' Chris Bennington, 14, lost more than a stone when he swapped pizza and chips for healthy alternatives Health and fitness Boost your health and fitness with fun and practical ideas to get active and improve your general health Healthy eating Information on how to achieve a balanced diet, tips to help you get your 5 A DAY, plus advice for vegetarians Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chipped tooth","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/broken-tooth","content":"Broken or knocked-out tooth - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Broken or knocked-out tooth  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Broken tooth Introduction  Knocking out a tooth is a medical emergency. If an adult tooth is knocked out, try putting it back in place and go straight to a dentist. Don't try to re-insert a baby tooth \u2013 take your child to see a dentist immediately. If you can't put an adult tooth back into position, place it in milk and contact your usual dental practice. You may be able to see a dentist straight away or you may be directed to an urgent care dental service. If you don\u2019t have a regular dentist, contact NHS 111 for advice on where to get urgent care. If the tooth is just chipped, you should make an appointment to see a dentist to fill the tooth or smooth it down. This isn't an emergency and can wait until the dental surgery is open. Find your nearest dentist. A knocked-out tooth If you knock out a tooth, you should: find the tooth hold it by the crown (the white bit that sticks out of the gum) lick the tooth clean if it's dirty, or rinse it in water put it back into position (adult teeth only); never try to re-insert a baby tooth (see below) bite on a handkerchief to hold the tooth in place go to see a dentist as an emergency If you can't put the tooth back in position, put it in milk and see a dentist straight away. The sooner a knocked-out tooth is re-implanted, the more likely it is to embed itself back into the gum. If your child knocks out a baby tooth, you shouldn't try to re-implant it because you may damage the adult tooth growing underneath. Take your child to see a dentist immediately. At the dentist If you've put your tooth back in yourself, the dentist will check that it's in the correct position by having a look and taking an X-ray. They'll splint it to the teeth either side to hold it in position for two weeks. Splinting is a technique that temporarily attaches the tooth to keep it in place. If you've put your tooth in milk and gone straight to the dentist, the dentist will numb the affected area and reposition the tooth. They'll check that it\u2019s in the correct position by taking an X-ray before splinting it to the teeth either side for two weeks. A lost tooth If you can't find your tooth, the space can be filled with one of the following: denture \u2013 a removable false tooth that you have to take out to clean bridge \u2013 where a false tooth is glued to the teeth either side using a special cement  implant \u2013 where a titanium screw is placed in the jaw bone, and after a few months a mould is taken so that a false tooth can be made Some of the above treatments can be provided on the NHS. Read more about different types of dental treatments. A denture, bridge or implant will improve the appearance of your smile and restore your confidence. Not everyone needs to have missing teeth replaced \u2013 some people don't mind having a gap. Speak to your dentist about your options, to help you decide what you would like. A broken or chipped tooth If you have broken your tooth, try to find the fragment, store it in milk and see a dentist as soon as possible during working hours. The dentist may be able to glue the fragment back on to the tooth. Don't worry if you can\u2019t find the fragment, your dentist will be able to use a tooth-coloured filling material to build your tooth up. If part of a back tooth is broken, it may either need a filling or a crown (also known as a cap). If the tooth is badly broken and the nerves are exposed, it may be a little sensitive and may even need root canal treatment. This involves removing the nerve and placing a root filling. Protecting your teeth during sports If you play a sport, such as rugby or hockey, where there's a risk of being hit in the mouth, you may want to consider getting a mouthguard made by a dentist to protect your teeth. This involves taking a mould of your teeth, which will be used to make the mouthguard \u2013 this will fit well and protect your mouth. \"Boil and bite\" mouthguards, where the mouthguard is moulded using hot water, are also available, but they're not as good as one made by your dentist. This type of mouthguard is often uncomfortable to wear and doesn\u2019t provide the same level of protection as a custom-made mouthguard. The Dental Trauma UK website has more information about the management of dental trauma and mouthguards. Save a knocked out tooth Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation shows the basic steps you can take to save teeth injured or damaged as a result of trauma. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2016 Next review due: 26\/05\/2019 Page last reviewed: 11\/12\/2015 Next review due: 11\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 236 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Video: how to save a knocked out tooth Dental abscess Dental health Gum disease NHS dental services Teeth grinding Toothache External links British Dental Health Foundation: veneers Dental Trauma UK: knocked out a tooth? Tooth decay Tooth decay occurs when acids in your mouth dissolve the outer layers of your teeth. Read more about how it's treated and how you can prevent it Dental treatments Dental treatments explained, from fillings to implants, plus how much they cost Finding an NHS dentist How to find an NHS dentist, including where to seek help if you have difficulties locating one in your local area NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chiropractic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/chiropractic","content":"Chiropractic - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chiropractic  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview chiropractic Clinical trials Chiropractic chiropractic What happens chiropractic Common uses chiropractic Safety and regulation chiropractic Evidence Introduction  According to the General Chiropractic Council (GCC), chiropractic is \"a health profession concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of mechanical disorders of the musculoskeletal system, and the effects of these disorders on the function of the nervous system and general health\". Chiropractors (practitioners of chiropractic) use their hands to treat disorders of the bones, muscles and joints. Treatments that involve using the hands in this way are called \"manual therapies\". Chiropractors use a range of techniques, with an emphasis on manipulation of the spine. They may also offer advice on diet, exercise and lifestyle, and rehabilitation programmes that involve exercises to do in your own time. Some chiropractors may also offer other alternative treatments, such as acupuncture. Learn more about how chiropractic is performed. Chiropractic is part of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM), meaning that it is different from treatments that are part of conventional western medicine. Some uses of chiropractic treatments are based on ideas and an \"evidence base\" not recognised by the majority of independent scientists. Uses Many chiropractors only treat conditions related to the spine, such as lower back or neck pain. Some chiropractors, however, claim to treat a wider range of conditions, including asthma, infant colic, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and many others. The GCC says that the care provided by chiropractors should be \"informed by the best available evidence, the preferences of the patient and the expertise of practitioners\". See conditions commonly treated by chiropractors for more information. Chiropractic and the NHS Use of chiropractic in the NHS is limited. Your GP or practice nurse can tell you more about the availability of NHS chiropractic in your area. Currently, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends manual therapy that might include spinal manipulation (as practised by chiropractors) as a treatment option for persistent lower back pain. Most people who use a chiropractor pay for private treatment. The cost of chiropractic varies and depends on the length of a particular chiropractic session. On average, a session will cost around £30-45. Read more about seeing a chiropractor on the NHS. Does it work? Chiropractic is a healthcare profession and not a single treatment. Evidence about chiropractic generally refers to one or more of the treatments that chiropractors offer. There is good evidence that manual therapy which may include spinal manipulation \u2013 as practised by chiropractors \u2013 can be an effective treatment for persistent lower back pain. Conventional treatments for persistent lower back pain include painkillers, exercise and physiotherapy. There is some, mostly poor-quality, evidence that spinal manipulation is an effective treatment for some other musculoskeletal conditions involving the bones, joints and soft tissue. The evidence on manual therapy, including spinal manipulation, is not strong enough in these cases to form the basis of a recommendation to use the treatment. There is no evidence that treatments offered by chiropractors are effective for other conditions. There is also no scientific evidence to support the idea that most illness is caused by misalignment of the spine. For more information, read our page on evidence for chiropractic's effectiveness. History of chiropractic Chiropractic was founded as a health profession in the US in 1895 by a Canadian called Daniel David Palmer, who had no conventional medical training. Palmer argued that most human disease is caused by misalignments of the spine that apply pressure on surrounding nerves. He called these misalignments \"subluxations\" (a term also used in conventional medicine, where it has a different meaning) and believed that they blocked the flow of a natural energy, or \"life force\", through the body. Correcting these subluxations, he argued, could restore the proper flow of energy, and so restore health. Thus, he saw chiropractic spinal manipulation as a treatment for 95% of all health conditions. Since its early days, chiropractic has fought for acceptance as a legitimate health profession. In the early 20th century, Palmer came close to declaring chiropractic a religion, at least partly because of difficulties in obtaining legal rights to practise in the US. More recently, elements within the profession have sought to place chiropractic on a more scientific footing through research to establish an evidence base for its principles and practice. Today, Palmer's ideas do not always form the basis on which chiropractors practise, but this varies widely between individual chiropractors. The GCC says the idea that subluxations are responsible for illness \"is not supported by any clinical research evidence\" and that this idea should be taught as a historical concept and not a current theoretical model. Chiropractors, says the GCC, are \"concerned with the framework of the muscles and bones that support the body (the musculoskeletal system)\" and with treating health conditions by helping the musculoskeletal system to work properly. Nonetheless, some UK chiropractors continue to claim that they can improve a range of health conditions by correcting subluxations. Page last reviewed: 20\/08\/2014 Next review due: 20\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 282 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Can I see a chiropractor on the NHS? Is CAM safe during pregnancy? Living with back pain External links British Chiropractic Association General Chiropractic Council Community content from HealthUnlocked Complementary and alternative medicine All about complementary and alternative medicine, including how to choose a practitioner Back pain guide Explore this guide for information about different types of back pain and how you can prevent it, plus advice on treatment 'My search for a back pain cure' Vicky Joseph spent years searching for a cure for her back pain. Find out what finally helped her NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chlamydia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chlamydia","content":"Chlamydia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chlamydia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chlamydia Real stories Chlamydia Clinical trials Chlamydia Community Chlamydia Chlamydia Symptoms Chlamydia Diagnosis Chlamydia Treatment Chlamydia Complications Introduction  Chlamydia is one of the most common sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in the UK. It's passed on from one person to another through unprotected sex (sex without a condom) and is particularly common in sexually active teenagers and young adults. If you live in England, are under 25 and are sexually active, it's recommended that you get tested for chlamydia every year or when you change sexual partner. In 2013, more than 200,000 people tested positive for chlamydia in England. Almost 7 in every 10 people diagnosed with the condition were under 25 years old. Symptoms of chlamydia Most people with chlamydia don't notice any symptoms and don't know they have it. If you do develop symptoms, you may experience: pain when urinating unusual discharge from the vagina, penis or rectum (back passage) in women, pain in the tummy, bleeding during or after sex, and bleeding between periods in men, pain and swelling in the testicles If you think you're at risk of having an STI or have any symptoms of chlamydia, visit your GP, community contraceptive service or local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic to get tested. Read more about chlamydia symptoms. How do you get chlamydia? Chlamydia is a bacterial infection. The bacteria are usually spread through sex or contact with infected genital fluids (semen or vaginal fluid). You can get chlamydia through: unprotected vaginal, anal or oral sex sharing sex toys that aren't washed or covered with a new condom each time they're used your genitals coming into contact with your partner's genitals \u2013 this means you can get chlamydia from someone even if there is no penetration, orgasm or ejaculation infected semen or vaginal fluid getting into your eye It can also be passed by a pregnant woman to her baby \u2013 read about the complications of chlamydia for more information about this. Chlamydia can't be passed on through casual contact, such as kissing and hugging, or from sharing baths, towels, swimming pools, toilet seats or cutlery. Is chlamydia serious? Although chlamydia doesn't usually cause any symptoms and can normally be treated with a short course of antibiotics, it can be serious if it's not treated early on. If left untreated, the infection can spread to other parts of your body and lead to long-term health problems, such as pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), epididymo-orchitis (inflammation of the testicles), and infertility. It can also sometimes cause reactive arthritis. This is why it's important to get tested and treated as soon as possible if you think you might have chlamydia. Read more about the complications of chlamydia. Getting tested for chlamydia Testing for chlamydia is done with a urine test or a swab test. You don't always need a physical examination by a nurse or doctor. Anyone can get a free and confidential chlamydia test at a sexual health clinic, a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic or a GP surgery. People under 25 years old can also get tested by the National Chlamydia Screening Programme (NCSP). This is often in places such as pharmacies, contraception clinics or colleges. If you live in England, you're under 25 and you're sexually active, you should get tested for chlamydia every year or when you change sexual partner, as you're more likely to catch it. You can also buy chlamydia testing kits to do at home, although the accuracy of these tests varies. If you do use one of these tests, speak to your pharmacist or GP for advice. Read more about getting a chlamydia test. How chlamydia is treated Chlamydia can usually be treated easily with antibiotics. You may be given some tablets to take all on one day, or a longer course of capsules to take for a week. You shouldn't have sex until you and your current sexual partner have finished your treatment. If you had the one-day course of treatment, you should avoid having sex for a week afterwards. It's important that your current sexual partner and any other sexual partners you've had during the last six months are also tested and treated to help stop the spread of the infection. The NCSP recommends that under 25s who have chlamydia should be offered another test around three months after being treated. This is because young adults who test positive for chlamydia are at increased risk of catching it again. Sexual health or GUM clinics can help you contact your sexual partners. Either you or the clinic can speak to them, or they can be sent a note advising them to get tested. The note won't have your name on it, so your confidentiality will be protected. Read more about treating chlamydia. Preventing chlamydia Anyone who is sexually active can catch chlamydia. You're most at risk if you have a new sexual partner or don't use a barrier method of contraception, such as a condom, when having sex. You can help to prevent the spread of chlamydia by: using a condom every time you have vaginal or anal sex using a condom to cover the penis during oral sex using a dam (a piece of thin, soft plastic or latex) to cover the female genitals during oral sex or when rubbing female genitals together not sharing sex toys If you do share sex toys, wash them or cover them with a new condom between each person who uses them. Common questions Find answers to some common questions about chlamydia: Is chlamydia only caught through sexual contact?  How soon do STI symptoms appear?  What should I do if I think I've got an STI?  Are sex toys safe?   What services do sexual health clinics provide?  Page last reviewed: 10\/06\/2015 Next review due: 10\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 474 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 192  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 201  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Chlamydia Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Chlamydia is the most common sexually transmitted infection (STI) in the UK. An expert gives advice on who's at risk, where to get tested and what the treatment involves. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Find sexual health services Free online chlamydia tests for under-25s Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Sexually transmitted infection (STI) advice External links Brook: STIs FPA: chlamydia National Chlamydia Screening Programme (NCSP) Need help now? Where to get sexual health help urgently, including advice about what to do after unprotected sex or sexual assault Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Chlamydia Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Choking","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/chq\/pages\/2301.aspx?categoryid=72&subcategoryid=722","content":"What should I do if someone is choking? - Health questions - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories You are here: Common health questions Accidents, first aid and treatments Choking What should I do if someone is choking? What should I do if someone is choking? This information applies to adults and children over one year old. If you want advice for babies under one year old, see What should I do if a baby is choking? Choking happens when someone's airway suddenly gets blocked, either fully or partly, so they can't breathe. Mild choking: encourage them to cough If the airway is only partly blocked, the person will usually be able to speak, cry, cough or breathe. They will usually be able to clear the blockage themselves. To help with mild choking in an adult or child over one year old: Encourage the person to keep coughing to try and clear the blockage. Ask the person to try to spit out the object if it's in their mouth. Don't put your fingers in their mouth to help them as they may bite you accidentally. If coughing doesn't work, start back blows (see below). Severe choking: back blows and abdominal thrusts Where choking is severe, the person will not be able to speak, cry, cough or breathe. Without help, they will eventually become unconscious. To help an adult or child over one year old: Stand behind the person and slightly to one side. Support their chest with one hand. Lean the person forward so that the object blocking their airway will come out of their mouth, rather than moving further down. Give up to five sharp blows between the person's shoulder blades with the heel of your hand. (The heel is between the palm of your hand and your wrist). Check if the blockage has cleared. If not, give up to five abdominal thrusts (see below). Important: Don't give abdominal thrusts to babies under one year old or to pregnant women. Stand behind the person who is choking. Place your arms around their waist and bend them forward. Clench one fist and place it right above their belly button. Put the other hand on top of your fist and pull sharply inwards and upwards. Repeat this movement up to five times. If the person's airway is still blocked after trying back blows and abdominal thrusts, get help immediately: Call 999 and ask for an ambulance. Tell the 999 operator that the person is choking. Continue with the cycles of five back blows and five abdominal thrusts until help arrives. If the person loses consciousness and they're not breathing, you should begin cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) with chest compressions. Read about how to carry out Compression-only CPR and CPR with rescue breaths. Complications Get urgent medical help (A&E, NHS Walk-in centre or their GP if in hours) if: they have a persistent cough after choking they feel something is still stuck in their throat Abdominal thrusts can cause serious injuries. Where this potentially life-saving treatment has been necessary, a health professional such as your GP or a doctor in A&E should always examine the person afterwards.  Further information: What should I do if a baby is choking? Where can I find out about basic first aid? First aid British Red Cross: how to deal with choking   What is the difference between choking and gagging? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. First Aider Danielle Bruce explains the difference between choking and gagging. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Page last reviewed: 30\/10\/2015 Next review due: 30\/10\/2017 More about: accidents, first aid and treatments Accident and emergency departments Cuts and grazes Burns and scalds First aid British Red Cross: first aid top tips St John Ambulance: poisoning Your first aid kit NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cholangiocarcinoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-bile-duct\/Pages\/Introduction.aspx","content":"Bile duct cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bile duct cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Clinical trials Bile duct cancer Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Symptoms Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Causes Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Treatment Cancer-of-the-bile-duct Prevention Introduction  Bile duct cancer (cholangiocarcinoma) is a rare but aggressive type of cancer. The bile duct system, or \"biliary\" system, is made up of a series of tubes that begin in the liver and end in the small intestine. Bile is a fluid the digestive system uses to help break down fats and digest foods. Symptoms of bile duct cancer In most cases, there are no signs of bile duct cancer until it reaches the later stages, when symptoms can include: jaundice \u2013 yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes, itchy skin, pale stools and dark-coloured urine  unintentional weight loss abdominal pain See your GP if you have signs of jaundice or are worried about other symptoms. While it is unlikely you have bile duct cancer, it is best to get it checked. Read more about the symptoms of bile duct cancer. Why does bile duct cancer happen? The exact cause of bile duct cancer is unknown. However, some things may increase your chances of developing the condition. The most common include being over 65 years old or having a rare chronic liver disease called primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). Read more about the causes of bile duct cancer. Types of bile duct cancer There are two main types of bile duct cancer, depending on where the cancer begins: cancer that starts in a part of the bile duct inside the liver is known as intrahepatic bile duct cancer cancer that starts in part of the bile duct outside the liver is known as extrahepatic bile duct cancer Diagnosis Cancer of the bile duct can be difficult to diagnose, so you may need several tests, including:  blood tests ultrasound scans computerised tomography (CT) scans magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans For some of these tests, you may need to be injected with a special dye that highlights your bile ducts. You may also need a biopsy. This involves removing a small sample of tissue so it can be studied under a microscope. However, in some cases, your surgeon may prefer to remove the suspected tumour based on the results of your scans alone. Read more about diagnosing bile duct cancer. How is bile duct cancer treated? Cancer of the bile duct can usually only be cured if cancerous cells haven't spread. If this is the case, some or all of the bile duct may be removed. Only a small proportion of bile duct cancer cases are diagnosed early enough to be suitable for surgery. This is because symptoms usually develop at a late stage. Despite this, treatment such as chemotherapy can relieve the symptoms of bile duct cancer and improve the quality of life of people in the advanced stages of the condition. Read more about treating bile duct cancer.   Who is affected? Less than 2,000 people are diagnosed with bile duct cancer each year in Great Britain. However, studies suggest that cases of bile duct cancer are increasing in most countries. The reasons for this are unknown. Most cases of bile duct cancer occur in people over the age of 65. The condition affects men and women almost equally. Can bile duct cancer be prevented? There are no guaranteed ways to avoid getting bile duct cancer, but you can reduce your chances of developing it. The most effective ways of achieving this are reducing your alcohol intake, as cirrhosis is a risk factor, and trying to ensure that you don't become infected with hepatitis B or hepatitis C. Read more about preventing bile duct cancer. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/10\/2014 Next review due: 24\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 107 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Carers and support End of life issues for carers Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Jaundice Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links The Alan Morement Memorial Fund (AMMF) British Liver Trust Cancer Research UK Macmillan Cancer Support PSC Support Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cholecystectomy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Laparoscopiccholecystectomy","content":"Gallbladder removal  - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Gallbladder removal   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Laparoscopiccholecystectomy Real stories Laparoscopiccholecystectomy Clinical trials Gallbladder removal Laparoscopiccholecystectomy What happens Laparoscopiccholecystectomy Recovery Laparoscopiccholecystectomy Complications Introduction  Gallbladder removal surgery, also known as a cholecystectomy, is a very common procedure. The gallbladder is a small, pouch-like organ in the upper right part of your tummy. It stores bile, a fluid produced by the liver that helps break down fatty foods. You don't need a gallbladder, so surgery to take it out is often recommended if you develop any problems with it. Why does my gallbladder need to be removed? Surgery to remove the gallbladder is usually carried out if you have painful gallstones. These are small stones that can form in the gallbladder as a result of an imbalance in the substances that make up bile. Gallstones often cause no symptoms and you may not realise you have them, but occasionally they can block the flow of bile and irritate the gallbladder (acute cholecystitis) or pancreas (acute pancreatitis). This can cause symptoms such as: sudden and intense tummy pain feeling and being sick yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice) Very occasionally it may be possible to take tablets to dissolve gallstones, but surgery to remove the gallbladder is the most effective treatment in the vast majority of cases. What happens during gallbladder removal surgery There are two main ways of removing a gallbladder: laparoscopic (keyhole) cholecystectomy \u2013 several small cuts (incisions) are made in your tummy (abdomen) and fine surgical instruments are used to access and remove your gallbladder open cholecystectomy \u2013 a single, larger incision is made in your tummy to access and remove your gallbladder Keyhole surgery is used most often because you can leave hospital sooner, recover faster and are left with smaller scars than with an open procedure. Both techniques are performed under general anaesthetic, which means you'll be asleep during the operation and won't feel any pain while it's carried out. Read more about how gallbladder removal surgery is performed. Recovering from gallbladder removal surgery It doesn't usually take long to recover from keyhole surgery to remove your gallbladder. Most people can leave hospital the same day or the next morning. You'll probably be able to return to most of your normal activities within two weeks. It takes longer to recover from open surgery. You may need to stay in hospital for three to five days and it could be six to eight weeks before you're feeling back to normal. Read more about recovering from gallbladder removal surgery. Living without a gallbladder You can lead a perfectly normal life without a gallbladder. Your liver will still make enough bile to digest your food but, instead of being stored in the gallbladder, it drips continuously into your digestive system. You may have been advised to eat a special diet before surgery, but this doesn't need to be continued afterwards. Instead, you should aim to have a generally healthy, balanced diet. Some people experience problems such as bloating or diarrhoea after surgery, although this usually improves within a few weeks. If you notice certain foods or drinks trigger these symptoms, you may wish to avoid them in the future. Read more about your diet after gallbladder surgery. Risks of gallbladder removal surgery Gallbladder removal surgery is considered to be a safe procedure, but like any type of surgery there is a risk of complications. Possible complications include: wound infection bile leaking into the tummy damage to one of the openings (ducts) carrying bile out of the liver blood clots Speak to your surgeon about the benefits and risks of surgery before your operation. Read more about the complications of gallbladder removal surgery. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1401 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 820  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 341  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Illustration of the gallbladder Liver Gallbladder Bile duct Bile duct enters duodenum Stomach Useful links NHS Choices links Gallstones Having an operation Acute cholecystitis Acute pancreatitis External links Royal College of Surgeons: Recovering after gallbladder removal (PDF, 284kb) Questions about surgery It's important to know the details of any operation you're going to have. Find out what you should ask before having surgery Find and choose services for Gallbladder removal Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cholecystitis, acute","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cholecystitis-acute","content":"Acute cholecystitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Acute cholecystitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cholecystitis-acute Clinical trials Acute cholecystitis   Acute cholecystitis is inflammation of the gallbladder. It usually occurs when a gallstone blocks the cystic duct. Gallstones are small stones, usually made of cholesterol, that form in the gallbladder. The cystic duct is the main opening of the gallbladder. Gallstones are very common, affecting about 1 in 10 adults in the UK. They don't usually cause symptoms, but they can occasionally cause episodes of pain (biliary colic) or acute cholecystitis. Acute cholecystitis is potentially serious. It usually needs to be treated in hospital with rest, intravenous fluids and antibiotics. This topic covers: Symptoms of acute cholecystitis When to seek medical advice What causes acute cholecysitis Diagnosing cholecystitis Treating cholecystitis Possible complications Preventing cholecystitis Symptoms of cholecystitis The main symptom of acute cholecystitis is a sudden sharp pain in the upper right-hand side of your tummy (abdomen). This pain spreads towards your right shoulder. The affected part of the abdomen is usually very tender, and breathing deeply can make the pain worse. Unlike other types of abdominal pain, the pain of acute cholecystitis is usually persistent and doesn't go away within a few hours. Some people may have additional symptoms, such as: a high temperature (fever) nausea and vomiting sweating loss of appetite yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice) a bulge in the abdomen When to seek medical advice See your GP as soon as possible if you develop sudden and severe abdominal pain, particularly if it lasts longer than a few hours or is accompanied by other symptoms, such as jaundice and a fever. If you're unable to contact your GP immediately, phone your local out-of-hours service or call NHS 111 for advice. It's important for acute cholecystitis to be diagnosed as soon as possible as there's a risk serious complications could develop if it isn't treated promptly.   What causes acute cholecystitis? The causes of acute cholecystitis can be grouped into two main categories: calculous cholecystitis and acalculous cholecystitis. Calculous cholecystitis Calculous cholecystitis is the most common, and usually less serious, type of acute cholecystitis. It accounts for around 95% of all cases. Calculous cholecystitis develops when the main opening to the gallbladder, called the cystic duct, gets blocked by a gallstone or a substance known as biliary sludge. Biliary sludge is a mixture of bile, a liquid produced by the liver that helps digest fats, and small cholesterol and salt crystals. The blockage in the cystic duct causes bile to build up in the gallbladder, increasing the pressure inside it and causing it to become inflamed. In around one in every five cases, the inflamed gallbladder also becomes infected by bacteria. Acalculous cholecystitis Acalculous cholecystitis is a less common, but usually more serious, type of acute cholecystitis. It usually develops as a complication of a serious illness, infection or injury that damages the gallbladder. Acalculous cholecystitis can be caused by accidental damage to the gallbladder during major surgery, serious injuries or burns, blood poisoning (sepsis), severe malnutrition or AIDS. Diagnosing acute cholecystitis If you have severe abdominal pain, your GP will probably carry out a simple test called Murphy's sign. You'll be asked to breathe in deeply with your GP's hand pressed on your tummy, just below your rib cage. Your gallbladder will move downwards as you breathe in. If you have cholecystitis, you'll experience sudden pain as your gallbladder reaches your doctor's hand. If your symptoms suggest you have acute cholecystitis, your GP will refer you to hospital immediately for further tests and treatment. Tests you may have in hospital include: blood tests \u2013 to check for signs of inflammation in your body an ultrasound scan of your abdomen \u2013 to check for gallstones or other signs of a problem with your gallbladder Other scans \u2013 such as an X-ray, computerised tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan \u2013 may also be carried out to examine your gallbladder in more detail if there's any uncertainty about your diagnosis. Treating acute cholecystitis If you're diagnosed with acute cholecystitis, you'll probably need to be admitted to hospital for treatment. Initial treatment Initial treatment will usually involve: not eating or drinking (fasting) to take the strain off your gallbladder receiving fluids through a drip directly into a vein (intravenously) to prevent dehydration taking medication to relieve your pain You'll also be given antibiotics if it's thought you have an infection. These often need to be continued for up to a week, during which time you may need to stay in hospital, or you may be able to go home. After initial treatment, any gallstones that may have caused acute cholecystitis usually fall back into the gallbladder and the inflammation will often settle down. Surgery Removing your gallbladder may be recommended at some point after initial treatment to prevent acute cholecystitis recurring and reduce your risk of developing potentially serious complications. This type of surgery is known as a cholecystectomy. Although uncommon, an alternative procedure called a percutaneous cholecystostomy may be carried out if you're too unwell to have surgery. This is where a needle is inserted through your abdomen to drain away the fluid that's built up in the gallbladder. If you're fit enough to have surgery, your doctors will decide when the best time to remove your gallbladder is. In some cases you may need to have surgery immediately or in the next day or two, or it may be necessary to wait a few weeks until the inflammation has settled down. Surgery can be carried out in three ways: laparoscopic cholecystectomy \u2013 a type of keyhole surgery where the gallbladder is removed using special surgical instruments inserted through a number of small cuts (incisions) in your abdomen single-incision laparoscopic cholecystectomy \u2013 where the gallbladder is removed through a single incision, which is usually made near the bellybutton open cholecystectomy \u2013 where the gallbladder is removed through a single larger incision in the abdomen Although some people who've had their gallbladder removed have reported symptoms of bloating and diarrhoea after eating certain foods, it's possible to lead a perfectly normal life without a gallbladder. The organ can be useful, but it's not essential as your liver will still produce bile to digest food. Read more about recovering from gallbladder removal. Possible complications Without appropriate treatment, acute cholecystitis can sometimes lead to potentially life-threatening complications. The main complications of acute cholecystitis are: the death of gallbladder tissue (gangrenous cholecystitis) \u2013 which can cause a serious infection that could spread throughout the body the gallbladder splitting open (perforated gallbladder) \u2013 which can spread the infection within your abdomen (peritonitis) or lead to a build-up of pus (abscess) Emergency surgery to remove the gallbladder is needed to treat these complications in about one in every five cases of acute cholecystitis. Preventing acute cholecystitis It isn't always possible to prevent acute cholecystitis, but you can lower your risk of developing it by reducing your risk of getting gallstones. One of the main things you can do to lower your chances of getting gallstones is to adopt a healthy, balanced diet and reduce the number of high-cholesterol foods you eat, as cholesterol is thought to contribute to the formation of gallstones. Being overweight, particularly being obese, also increases your risk of developing gallstones. You should therefore control your weight by eating a healthy diet and exercising regularly. However, low-calorie rapid weight loss diets should be avoided because there's evidence they can disrupt your bile chemistry and actually increase your risk of developing gallstones. A more gradual weight loss plan is best.  Read more about preventing gallstones. The gallbladder The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped organ located beneath the liver. It's main purpose is to store and concentrate bile. The liver produces bile, a liquid that helps digest fats and carries toxins excreted by the liver. Bile is passed from the liver through a series of channels called bile ducts into the gallbladder, where it's stored. Over time bile becomes more concentrated, which makes it more effective at digesting fats. The gallbladder releases bile into the digestive system when it's needed. The gallbladder is an organ that's useful, but not essential. It can safely be removed without interfering with your ability to digest food. Page last reviewed: 04\/08\/2016 Next review due: 04\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 500 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 307  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 98  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Illustration of the gallbladder 1. Liver 2. Gallbladder 3. Bile duct 4. Bile duct enters the duodenum 5. Stomach Useful links NHS Choices links Diet after gallbladder surgery Facts about fat Gallbladder removal Gallstones High cholesterol External links National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): single-incision laparoscopic cholecystectomy Royal College of Surgeons: recovering after gallbladder removal (PDF, 284kb) Lower your cholesterol Foods you can eat and those you should avoid to help lower your cholesterol Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cholera","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cholera","content":"Cholera - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cholera  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cholera Clinical trials Cholera Cholera Vaccination Introduction  Cholera is a potentially fatal bacterial infection caused by consuming contaminated food or water. Not everyone who becomes infected will develop symptoms, but those who do will usually experience: severe, watery diarrhoea feeling and being sick stomach cramps These symptoms generally develop within a few days of infection, although they can sometimes occur after just a few hours. Without treatment, the combination of diarrhoea and vomiting can cause a person to quickly become dehydrated and go into shock (where there's a sudden massive drop in blood pressure). In the most severe cases, cholera can be fatal. At-risk areas Cholera can spread if food and, in particular, water become contaminated with the stools of an infected person. This is why cholera is most widespread in regions of the world with poor sanitation, such as parts of: sub-Saharan Africa south and south-east Asia the Middle East central America and the Caribbean Mass outbreaks of cholera often occur after natural disasters or during war, as a result of overcrowding in poor living conditions and a lack of access to clean water. The World Health Organization estimates that there are 1.4 to 4.3 million cases of cholera worldwide every year. The condition is also responsible for many thousands of deaths. There haven't been any cases of cholera originating in England and Wales for over 100 years, although travellers do occasionally bring the infection back with them. However, this is rare, with only six cases of cholera reported in England and Wales during 2013\/14. Advice for travellers If you're travelling to parts of the world known to be affected by cholera, you should take some basic precautions to prevent a cholera infection and other causes of travellers' diarrhoea. For example, you should: only drink water that's been recently boiled, or drink from a bottle that's been properly sealed avoid eating ice cream and don't have ice in your drinks avoid uncooked fruit and vegetables, unless you've washed them in safe water or peeled them yourself avoid shellfish, seafood and salads Read more about food and water safety abroad. Cholera vaccination Vaccination against cholera may sometimes be recommended if you're travelling to areas where the infection is widespread, particularly if you're an aid worker and likely to have limited access to medical services. You should speak to a nurse or doctor about whether you need a cholera vaccination well in advance of travelling, if you're considering visiting an area affected by cholera. The cholera vaccine is available as a drink, which is given in two or three separate doses that are taken one to six weeks apart. The vaccine is estimated to be about 85% effective in the months after vaccination, although the level of protection gradually reduces over time and booster doses will eventually be needed if you continue to be at risk. Read more about cholera vaccination. Treating cholera Cholera can be easily treated using oral rehydration solution (ORS) to prevent dehydration and shock. ORS comes as a sachet containing a mixture of salts and glucose, which is dissolved in water. It's ideal for replacing the fluids and minerals that are lost when a person becomes dehydrated. ORS sachets are available from pharmacists, camping shops and travel clinics. If you're travelling to regions of the world affected by cholera, you should take ORS sachets with you as a precaution. When a person with cholera is very severely dehydrated, intravenous antibiotics may be recommended to shorten the duration of diarrhoea and speed up rehydration. Read more about accessing healthcare abroad. Page last reviewed: 18\/12\/2015 Next review due: 18\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 375 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 205  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Travel health Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A simple guide to health precautions when travelling abroad, including vaccinations, taking condoms and a first aid kit, and being careful about drinking water. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Travel health Travel vaccinations Diarrhoea Dehydration External links GOV.UK: foreign travel advice Fit for Travel NaTHNaC WHO: cholera Yellow Card Scheme Diarrhoea Diarrhoea is passing looser or more frequent stools than is normal for you. Find out what causes it and how to treat it Food and water abroad Find out how to protect yourself against illnesses in contaminated food and water NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cholesteatoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cholesteatoma","content":"Cholesteatoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cholesteatoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cholesteatoma Clinical trials Cholesteatoma Introduction  A cholesteatoma is an uncommon abnormal collection of skin cells inside your ear. Left untreated, it can continue to grow and damage the delicate structures deep inside your ear, such as the tiny bones and organs essential for hearing and balance. A cholesteatoma can lead to: an ear infection, causing discharge from the ear hearing loss, which can be permanent  vertigo (the sensation that you, or the world around you, is spinning) tinnitus (hearing sounds coming from inside the body, rather than from an outside source) damage to your facial nerve, causing weakness in half your face In very rare cases, an infection can spread into the inner ear and brain, leading to a brain abscess or meningitis. What are the warning signs? Usually only one ear is affected by a cholesteatoma. The two most common symptoms are: persistent, often smelly, discharge from the affected ear gradual loss of hearing in the affected ear Some people may also experience some minor discomfort or a feeling of fullness in their ear. What causes cholesteatomas? A cholesteatoma can develop if part of the eardrum collapses because of problems equalising the pressure across it. This occurs when the Eustachian tube is not working properly. This is a thin tube that runs from the middle ear to the back of the nose. One of its main functions is to help maintain normal air pressure within the ear. Dead skin cells are normally passed out of the ear, but if the eardrum collapses, it may create a pocket where the dead skin cells can collect. A cholesteatoma can also occur after the eardrum has been damaged through an injury or infection, or after any kind of ear surgery. It is possible to be born with a cholesteatoma as a result of the structures within the ear developing abnormally, but this is rare. Seeing your GP You should see your GP if you have problems with your hearing or persistent discharge from your ear. Your GP may diagnose or suspect a cholesteatoma after examining your ear with an otoscope, an instrument with a light and magnifying glass that allows doctors to see inside your ear. If it's possible you just have an ear infection, you may initially be given a course of antibiotics to see if your symptoms improve. If your GP thinks you have a cholesteatoma, they will refer you to hospital so your ear can be examined by an ear, nose and throat (ENT) surgeon. Treating a cholesteatoma To confirm that you have a cholesteatoma, an ENT surgeon will re-examine your ear and may carry out some hearing tests. You may also have a computerised tomography (CT) scan to see which parts of your ear are affected. Surgery In most cases, a cholesteatoma will be removed during an operation performed under general anaesthetic. The surgeon generally makes a cut either behind or just in front and above your ear. As well as removing the dead skin cells, they may also need to remove some of the sponge-like mastoid bone (part of the skull behind your ear) and repair any hole in your eardrum. When the operation is complete, you ear may be packed with a dressing that will need to be removed a few weeks later. You will be advised about how to look after it in the meantime. The risks of surgery are similar to those of leaving the cholesteatoma untreated, such as hearing loss, tinnitus and vertigo, but generally the benefits of removing the cholesteatoma far outweigh the risks. You should discuss the risks with your surgeon. After surgery You will often need to stay in hospital at least overnight after the operation, and you should plan to take a week or two off work. Your surgeon can advise you about this. Self care advice When you get home, take care to keep the operated ear dry. You should be able to wash your hair after a week, provided you do not get water inside the ear. This can be avoided by plugging the ear with cotton wool coated with Vaseline. Swimming, strenuous activities and sports may need to be avoided for a few weeks. Check with your surgeon at your follow-up appointment when it is safe to resume these. Your surgeon may also recommend avoiding flying for several weeks after surgery. Again, you can ask them about this at your follow-up appointment. Follow-up appointments If your stitches are not dissolvable, they may need to be removed by your practice nurse after a week or two. Most people have a follow-up appointment in a clinic within a few weeks of the operation, when any dressings in your ear will be removed. A cholesteatoma can come back, and one may develop in your other ear, so you will need to attend regular follow-up appointments to monitor this.  Some people need a second operation after about a year to check there are no skin cells left behind. When to seek medical advice You should contact your GP or the ENT department of the hospital if you experience: discharge or significant bleeding from your ear or wound a high temperature (fever) severe or increasing pain These problems could be a sign of a complication, such as an infection. JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 10\/11\/2014 Next review due: 10\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 247 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 151  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Having surgery Hearing loss Middle ear infection Tinnitus Vertigo External links Action on Hearing Loss Are you losing your hearing? Learn to spot signs that you are losing your hearing and what to do if you suspect you have hearing loss Questions about surgery It's important to know the details of any operation you're going to have. Find out what you should ask before having surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cholesterol, high","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cholesterol","content":"High cholesterol - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories High cholesterol  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cholesterol Clinical trials Cholesterol Community High cholesterol Cholesterol Causes Cholesterol Diagnosis Cholesterol Treatment Cholesterol Prevention Introduction  Cholesterol is a fatty substance known as a lipid and is vital for the normal functioning of the body. It's mainly made by the liver, but can also be found in some foods. Having an excessively high level of lipids in your blood (hyperlipidemia) can have an effect on your health. High cholesterol itself doesn't usually cause any symptoms, but it increases your risk of serious health conditions. About cholesterol Cholesterol is carried in your blood by proteins. When the two combine, they're called lipoproteins. The two main types of lipoprotein are:  high-density lipoprotein (HDL) \u2013 carries cholesterol away from the cells and back to the liver, where it's either broken down or passed out of the body as a waste product; for this reason, HDL is referred to as \"good cholesterol\", and higher levels are better low-density lipoprotein (LDL) \u2013 carries cholesterol to the cells that need it, but if there's too much cholesterol for the cells to use, it can build up in the artery walls, leading to disease of the arteries; for this reason, LDL is known as \"bad cholesterol\" The amount of cholesterol in the blood \u2013 both HDL and LDL \u2013 can be measured with a blood test. The recommended cholesterol levels in the blood vary between those with a higher or lower risk of developing arterial disease. Why should I lower my cholesterol? Evidence strongly indicates that high cholesterol can increase the risk of: narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis)  heart attack  stroke  transient ischaemic attack (TIA) \u2013 often known as a \"mini stroke\" peripheral arterial disease (PAD) This is because cholesterol can build up in the artery wall, restricting the blood flow to your heart, brain and the rest of your body. It also increases the risk of a blood clot developing somewhere in your body. Your risk of developing coronary heart disease also rises as your blood's cholesterol level increases. This can cause pain in your chest or arm during stress or physical activity (angina). What causes high cholesterol? Many factors can increase your chances of having heart problems or a stroke if you have high cholesterol. These include: an unhealthy diet \u2013 in particular, eating high levels of saturated fat smoking \u2013 a chemical found in cigarettes called acrolein stops HDL transporting cholesterol from fatty deposits to the liver, leading to narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis) having diabetes or high blood pressure (hypertension) having a family history of stroke or heart disease There's also an inherited condition called familial hypercholesterolaemia, which can cause high cholesterol even in someone who eats healthily. Read more about the causes of high cholesterol. When should my cholesterol levels be tested? Your GP may recommend that you have your blood cholesterol levels tested if you: have been diagnosed with coronary heart disease, stroke or mini stroke (TIA), or peripheral arterial disease (PAD) have a family history of early cardiovascular disease have a close family member who has a cholesterol-related condition are overweight have high blood pressure, diabetes, or a health condition that can increase cholesterol levels Read more about how cholesterol is tested. What should my cholesterol levels be? Blood cholesterol is measured in units called millimoles per litre of blood, often shortened to mmol\/L. As a general guide, total cholesterol levels should be: 5mmol\/L or less for healthy adults 4mmol\/L or less for those at high risk As a general guide, LDL levels should be: 3mmol\/L or less for healthy adults 2mmol\/L or less for those at high risk An ideal level of HDL is above 1mmol\/L. A lower level of HDL can increase your risk of heart disease. Your ratio of total cholesterol to HDL may also be calculated. This is your total cholesterol level divided by your HDL level. Generally, this ratio should be below four, as a higher ratio increases your risk of heart disease. However, cholesterol is only one risk factor and the level at which specific treatment is required will depend on whether other risk factors, such as smoking and high blood pressure, are also present. How can I lower my cholesterol level? The first step in reducing your cholesterol is to maintain a healthy, balanced diet. It's important to keep your diet low in fatty food. You can swap food containing saturated fat for fruit, vegetables and wholegrain cereals. This will also help prevent high cholesterol returning. Other lifestyle changes, such as taking regular exercise and giving up smoking (if you smoke), can also make a big difference in helping to lower your cholesterol. If these measures don't reduce your cholesterol and you continue to have a high risk of developing heart disease, your GP may prescribe a cholesterol-lowering medication, such as statins. Your GP will take into account the risk of any side effects from statins, and the benefit of lowering your cholesterol must outweigh any risks. Read more about how high cholesterol is treated. Page last reviewed: 27\/08\/2015 Next review due: 27\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1578 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 665  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 400  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 115  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 98  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 300  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atherosclerosis Facts about fat Heart attack Lower your cholesterol NHS Health Check News: latest stories on food and diet Statins Stroke External links British Cardiovascular Society BDA: food fact sheets British Heart Foundation Heart UK High Cholesterol Decision Aid Lab Tests Online: cholesterol test Option grid: treatment decision aid Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Lower your cholesterol Foods you can eat and those you should avoid to help lower your cholesterol Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cholesterol-lowering medicines, statins","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cholesterol-lowering-medicines-statins","content":"Statins - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Statins  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Statins Cholesterol-lowering-medicines-statins Uses Cholesterol-lowering-medicines-statins Considerations Cholesterol-lowering-medicines-statins Side effects Introduction  Statins are a group of medicines that can help lower the level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in the blood. LDL cholesterol is often referred to as \"bad cholesterol\", and statins reduce the production of it inside the liver. Why have I been offered statins? Having a high level of LDL cholesterol is potentially dangerous, as it can lead to a hardening and narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and cardiovascular disease (CVD). CVD is a general term that describes a disease of the heart or blood vessels. It's the most common cause of death in the UK. The main types of CVD are: coronary heart disease \u2013 when the blood supply to the heart becomes restricted angina \u2013 sharp chest pain, caused by coronary heart disease heart attacks \u2013 when the supply of blood to the heart is suddenly blocked stroke \u2013 when the supply of blood to the brain becomes blocked Your doctor may recommend taking statins if either: you've been diagnosed with a form of CVD your personal and family medical history suggests you're likely to develop CVD at some point over the next 10 years and lifestyle measures (see below) haven't reduced this risk Read more about when statins may be recommended. Taking statins Statins come as tablets that are taken once a day. The tablets should normally be taken at the same time each day \u2013 most people take them just before going to bed. In most cases, treatment with statins continues for life, as stopping the medication causes your cholesterol to return to a high level within a few weeks. If you ever forget to take your dose, don't take an extra one to make up for it. Just take your next dose as usual the following day. If you accidentally take too many statin tablets (more than your usual daily dose), contact your doctor or pharmacist for advice, or call NHS 111. Cautions and interactions Statins can sometimes interact with other medicines, increasing the risk of unpleasant side effects, such as muscle damage. Some types of statin can also interact with grapefruit juice. It's very important to read the information leaflet that comes with your medication, to check if there are any interactions you should be aware of. If in doubt, contact your GP or pharmacist for advice. Read more things to consider when taking statins. Side effects of statins Many people who take statins experience no or very few side effects. Others experience some troublesome \u2013 but usually minor \u2013 side effects, such as an upset stomach, headache or feeling sick. Your doctor should discuss the risks and benefits of taking statins if they're offered to you. Cases that involve more serious side effects, such as kidney failure, tend to get a great deal of media coverage, but these are rare. The British Heart Foundation states than just 1 in every 10,000 people who take statins will experience a potentially dangerous side effect. The risks of any side effects also have to be balanced against the benefits of preventing serious problems. A review of scientific studies into the effectiveness of statins found that around one in every 50 people who take the medication for five years will avoid a serious event, such as a heart attack or stroke, as a result. Read more about the side effects of statins. Alternatives to statins If you're at risk of developing CVD in the near future, your doctor will usually recommend lifestyle measures to reduce this risk before they suggest that you take statins. Lifestyle measures that can reduce your cholesterol level and CVD risk include: eating a healthy, balanced diet exercising regularly maintaining a healthy weight limiting the amount of alcohol you drink stopping smoking Statins may be recommended if these measures don\u2019t help. Read more about: treating high cholesterol preventing CVD Types of statin There are five types of statin available via prescription in the UK: atorvastatin (Lipitor) fluvastatin (Lescol) pravastatin (Lipostat) rosuvastatin (Crestor) simvastatin (Zocor) Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/01\/2016 Next review due: 14\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 864 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 251  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 267  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 181  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links High cholesterol Cardiovascular disease Atherosclerosis Heart attack Lower your cholesterol News: NICE draft guidelines on statins External links Circulation Foundation British Heart Foundation British Cardiovascular Society Heart UK: cholesterol charity Yellow Card Scheme Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Eat less saturated fat Eating too much saturated fat can cause raised cholesterol. Follow these practical tips on how to cut down NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Choriocarcinoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/persistent-trophoblastic-disease","content":"Persistent trophoblastic disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma Persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma  Persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma are very rare pregnancy-related tumours known as gestational trophoblastic tumours (GTTs). Persistent trophoblastic disease In the UK, about 1 in 600 pregnancies each year are found to be a molar pregnancy, where the foetus and placenta do not form properly and a baby does not usually develop. This typically results in dilatation and curettage (D&C) and loss of the pregnancy (miscarriage). In most molar pregnancies, any remaining abnormal tissue in the womb spontaneously dies off. But in a small proportion of women, the tissue can remain and grow further into the lining of the womb and, like a cancer, spread to other areas of the body. This is known as persistent trophoblastic disease. Vaginal bleeding is the most common symptom of persistent trophoblastic disease. Further specialist treatment for persistent trophoblastic disease is needed to make sure that all of the remaining molar tissue is destroyed. In England, there are two specialist centres for treating the condition \u2013 Charing Cross Hospital in London and Weston Park Hospital in Sheffield. You may also need to have powerful cancer-killing medicine (chemotherapy) as part of your treatment. Choriocarcinoma Choriocarcinoma is a very rare type of cancer that occurs in around 1 in 50,000 pregnancies. It affects less than 20 women each year in the UK. Choriocarcinoma can develop if the cells left behind after a pregnancy become cancerous. This can happen after any pregnancy, but it is more likely after molar pregnancies. It can occur several months, or even years, after a pregnancy. Although choriocarcinoma starts in the womb, it can spread to other parts of the body \u2013 most commonly, the lungs. If it spreads to your lungs, you may have symptoms such as coughing, difficulty breathing and chest pain. If choriocarcinoma spreads to your abdomen, you may experience abdominal pain. If it spreads to your vagina, you may have heavy bleeding and a lump (nodule) may develop on your vagina. If it spreads to your brain, it may cause headaches or seizures. Risks Both persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma are very rare. If you have had a molar pregnancy, you will be monitored closely in case you develop either of these conditions. If you have had a complete molar pregnancy, you have about a 1 in 10 chance of developing either persistent trophoblastic disease or choriocarcinoma. If you have had a partial molar pregnancy, the risk is around 1 in 100. Outlook Overall, the outlook for persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma is excellent, and 98-100% of women who develop a gestational trophoblastic cancer are cured. However, the outlook for each case will depend on the individual's personal circumstances. Want to know more? Cancer Research UK: persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma Charing Cross Hospital: Hydatidiform Mole and Choriocarcinoma UK Information and Support Service The Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre What is cancer? The body is made up of millions of different types of cells. Cancer occurs when cells multiply in an abnormal way. When cancer affects organs and solid tissues, it causes a growth (tumour) to form. Cancer can occur in any part of the body where the cells multiply abnormally. Read more about cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/02\/2015 Next review due: 09\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 7 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Dilatation and curettage (D&C) Molar pregnancy External links Cancer Research UK Hydatidiform Mole and Choriocarcinoma UK Information and Support Service The Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chorionic villus sampling","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chorionic-Villus-sampling","content":"Chorionic villus sampling - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chorionic villus sampling  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chorionic-Villus-sampling Clinical trials Chorionic villus sampling Chorionic-Villus-sampling Why it's offered Chorionic-Villus-sampling What happens Chorionic-Villus-sampling Results Chorionic-Villus-sampling Risks Introduction  Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) is a test you may be offered during pregnancy to check if your baby has a genetic disorder, such as Down\u2019s syndrome. It involves removing and testing a small sample of cells from the placenta (the organ linking the mother\u2019s blood supply with her unborn baby\u2019s). When CVS is offered CVS isn't routinely offered to all pregnant women. It's only offered if there's a high risk your baby could have a genetic condition. This could be because: an earlier antenatal screening test has suggested there may be a problem, such as Down's syndrome, Edward's syndrome or Patau's syndrome, or sickle cell anaemia you've had a previous pregnancy with these problems you have a family history of a genetic condition, such as cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy, and an abnormality is detected in your baby during a routine ultrasound scan It's important to remember that you don't have to have CVS if it's offered. It's up to you to decide whether you want it. Your midwife or doctor will speak to you about what the test involves, and let you know what the possible benefits and risks are, to help you make a decision. Read more about why CVS is offered and deciding whether to have it. How CVS is performed CVS is usually carried out between the 11th and 14th weeks of pregnancy, although it's sometimes performed later than this if necessary. During the test, a small sample of cells will be removed from the placenta using one of two methods: transabdominal CVS \u2013 a needle is inserted through your tummy (this is the most common method used) transcervical CVS \u2013 a tube or small forceps (smooth metal instruments that look like tongs) are inserted through the cervix (the neck of the womb) The test itself takes about 10 minutes, although the whole consultation may take about 30 minutes. The CVS procedure is usually described as being uncomfortable rather than painful, although you may experience some cramps that are similar to period pains for a day or two afterwards. Read more about what happens during CVS. Getting your results The first results of the test should be available within three working days and this will tell you whether a major chromosome condition, such as Down's, Edward's or Patau's syndrome, has been discovered. If rarer conditions are also being tested for, it can take two to three weeks or more for the results to come back. If your test shows that your baby has a serious inherited or genetic disorder, the implications will be fully discussed with you. There's no cure for most of the conditions CVS finds, so you'll need to consider your options carefully. You may choose to continue with your pregnancy, while gathering information about the condition so you're fully prepared, or you may consider having a termination (abortion). Read more about the results of CVS. What are the risks of CVS? Before you decide to have CVS, the risks and possible complications will be discussed with you. One of the main risks associated with CVS is miscarriage, which is the loss of the pregnancy in the first 23 weeks. This is estimated to occur in 1-2% of women who have CVS. There are also some other risks, such as infection or needing to have the procedure again because it wasn't possible to accurately test the first sample that was removed. The risk of CVS causing complications is higher if it's carried out before the 10th week of pregnancy, which is why the test is only carried out after this point. Read more about the risks of CVS. What are the alternatives? An alternative to CVS is a test called amniocentesis. This is where a small sample of amniotic fluid (the fluid that surrounds the baby in the womb) is removed for testing. It's usually carried out between the 15th and 18th week of pregnancy, although it can be performed later than this if necessary. This test may have a slightly smaller risk of causing a miscarriage, but your pregnancy will be at a more advanced stage before you can get the results, so you'll have a bit less time to consider your options. If you're offered tests to look for a genetic disorder in your baby, a specialist involved in carrying out the test will be able to discuss the different options with you, and help you make a decision. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 06\/08\/2015 Next review due: 06\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 114 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Amniocentesis Antenatal care Genetics Screening tests in pregnancy External links Antenatal Results and Choices NCT: antenatal screening NHS Screening Programme: chorionic villus sampling (PDF, 344kb) Antenatal checks and tests Find out about the checks, tests and screening you'll be offered in pregnancy, including blood and urine tests Screening in pregnancy Screening for abnormalities in pregnancy, including inherited disorders such as sickle cell NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chronic fatigue syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chronic-fatigue-syndrome","content":"Chronic fatigue syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic fatigue syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Clinical trials Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Community Chronic fatigue syndrome Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Symptoms Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Causes Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Diagnosis Chronic-fatigue-syndrome Treatment Introduction  Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) causes persistent fatigue (exhaustion) that affects everyday life and doesn't go away with sleep or rest.  CFS is also known as ME, which stands for myalgic encephalomyelitis. There's some debate over the correct term to use for the condition, but these pages will refer to the condition as CFS. CFS is a serious condition that can cause long-term illness and disability, but many people \u2013 particularly children and young people \u2013 improve over time. Who is affected? It's estimated around 250,000 people in the UK have CFS. Anyone can get the condition, although it's more common in women than men. It usually develops when people are in their early 20s to mid-40s. Children can also be affected, usually between the ages of 13 and 15.  How it affects quality of life Most cases of CFS are mild or moderate, but up to one in four people with CFS have severe symptoms. These are defined as follows:  mild \u2013 you're able to care for yourself, but may need days off work to rest moderate \u2013 you may have reduced mobility, and your symptoms can vary; you may also have disturbed sleep patterns and need to sleep in the afternoon severe \u2013 you're able to carry out minimal daily tasks, such as brushing your teeth, but have significantly reduced mobility, and may also have difficulty concentrating Read more about the symptoms of CFS. Why it happens It's not known exactly what causes CFS. Various theories have been suggested, including: a viral or bacterial infection problems with the immune system an imbalance of hormones psychiatric problems, such as stress and emotional trauma Some people are thought to be more susceptible to the condition because of their genes, as the condition is more common in some families. More research is needed to confirm exactly what causes the condition. Read more about the causes of CFS. How it is diagnosed There are specific guidelines issued by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) about the diagnosis and management of CFS. NICE says a diagnosis of CFS should be considered if you meet specific criteria regarding your fatigue \u2013 for example, it can't be explained by other conditions \u2013 and if you also have other symptoms, such as sleeping problems or problems thinking and concentrating. The diagnosis can then be confirmed if these symptoms are experienced for several months. Read more about diagnosing CFS. How it is treated Treatment for CFS may be able to reduce the symptoms. Everyone with CFS responds to treatment differently, so your treatment plan will be tailored to you. Some of the main treatments include: cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) a structured exercise programme called graded exercise therapy medication to control pain, nausea and sleeping problems Most people with CFS improve over time, although some people don't make a full recovery. It's also likely there will be periods when symptoms get better or worse. Children and young people with CFS are more likely to recover fully. Read more about treating CFS. Different terms for the condition chronic fatigue syndrome \u2013 often used and preferred by doctors as there's little evidence of brain and spinal cord inflammation, which the term ME suggests; ME is also thought to be too specific to cover all the symptoms of the condition myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) \u2013 preferred by those who feel CFS is not specific enough and doesn't reflect the severity and different types of fatigue, and implies that fatigue is the only symptom (myalgic encephalopathy is sometimes also used) systemic exertion intolerance disease (SEID) \u2013 a new term suggested in a 2015 report by the US Institute of Medicine, which implies that the condition affects many systems in the body (systemic); the word \"disease\" highlights the serious nature of the condition in some people Page last reviewed: 25\/02\/2015 Next review due: 25\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1409 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 407  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 246  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 152  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 162  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 442  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) video Depression Insomnia Why am I tired all the time? External links Action for ME Association of Young People with ME Brain and Spine Foundation Invest in ME The ME Association ME Research UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): chronic fatigue syndrome The National ME Centre Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Chronic fatigue syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chronic kidney disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Kidney-disease-chronic","content":"Chronic kidney disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic kidney disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Kidney-disease-chronic Real stories Kidney-disease-chronic Clinical trials Kidney-disease-chronic Community Kidney-disease-chronic Chronic kidney disease Kidney-disease-chronic Symptoms Kidney-disease-chronic Diagnosis Kidney-disease-chronic Treatment Kidney-disease-chronic Living with Kidney-disease-chronic Prevention   Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a long-term condition where the kidneys don't work as well as they should. It's a common condition often associated with getting older. Anyone can get it, although it's more common in black people and people of south Asian origin. CKD can get gradually worse over time and eventually the kidneys may stop working altogether, but this is uncommon. Many people with kidney disease are able to live long, largely normal lives. This page covers: Symptoms Causes Tests and diagnosis Treatments Outlook Symptoms of CKD There are usually no symptoms of kidney disease in the early stages. It may only be picked up if blood or urine tests carried out for another reason detect a possible problem with your kidneys. When it reaches a more advanced stage, symptoms can include: tiredness swollen ankles, feet or hands shortness of breath feeling sick blood in your urine See your GP if you have persistent or worrying symptoms that you think could be caused by kidney disease. Read more about the symptoms of CKD. Causes of CKD Kidney disease is usually caused by other conditions that put a strain on the kidneys. Often it's the result of a combination of different problems. CKD can be caused by: high blood pressure \u2013 over time, this can put strain on the small blood vessels in the kidneys and stop the kidneys working properly diabetes \u2013 too much glucose in your blood can damage the tiny filters in the kidneys high cholesterol \u2013 this can cause a build-up of fatty deposits in the blood vessels supplying your kidneys, which can make it harder for them to work properly kidney infections glomerulonephritis \u2013 kidney inflammation polycystic kidney disease \u2013 an inherited condition where growths called cysts develop in the kidneys blockages in the flow of urine \u2013 for example, from recurrent kidney stones or an enlarged prostate long-term, regular use of certain medicines \u2013 such as lithium and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) You can help prevent CKD by making healthy lifestyle changes and ensuring any underlying conditions you have are well controlled. Tests for CKD CKD can be diagnosed using blood and urine tests. These tests are used to look for high levels of certain substances in your blood and urine that are signs your kidneys aren't working properly. If you're at a high risk of developing kidney disease \u2013 for example, you have one of the conditions mentioned above \u2013 you may be advised to have regular tests to check for CKD so it's picked up at an early stage. The results of your blood and urine tests can be used to tell the stage of your kidney disease. This is a number that reflects how severe the damage to your kidneys is, with a higher number indicating more serious CKD. Read more about how CKD is diagnosed. Treatments for CKD There's no cure for CKD, but treatment can help relieve the symptoms and stop it getting worse. Your treatment will depend on how severe your kidney disease is. The main treatments are: lifestyle changes to ensure you remain as healthy as possible medication to control associated problems such as high blood pressure and high cholesterol dialysis \u2013 treatment to replicate some of the kidney's functions; this may be necessary in advanced CKD kidney transplant \u2013 this may also be necessary in advanced CKD You'll also be advised to have regular check-ups to monitor your condition. Read more about how CKD is treated and living with CKD. Outlook for CKD CKD can range from a mild condition with no or few symptoms, to a very serious condition where the kidneys stop working, sometimes called kidney failure. Most people with CKD will be able to control their condition with medication and regular check-ups. CKD only progresses to kidney failure in around 1 in 50 people with the condition. But if you have CKD, even if it's mild, you're at an increased risk of developing other serious problems, such as cardiovascular disease. This is a group of conditions affecting the heart and blood vessels, which includes heart attacks and strokes. Cardiovascular disease is one of the main causes of death in people with kidney disease, although healthy lifestyle changes and medication can help reduce your risk of developing it. Want to know more? British Kidney Patient Association infoKID: children's kidney conditions  Kidney Research UK: chronic kidney disease National Kidney Federation: about the kidneys Page last reviewed: 15\/08\/2016 Next review due: 15\/08\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 494 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 235  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 146  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dialysis Kidney health Kidney transplant NHS Health Check Find kidney disease services External links British Kidney Patient Association Established Kidney Failure Decision Aid healthtalk.org: kidney health Kidney Patient Guide Kidney Research UK National Kidney Federation PKD charity Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic","content":"Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Clinical trials leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Community Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Diagnosis leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Treatment leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Complications   Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is a type of cancer that affects the white blood cells and tends to progress slowly over many years. It mostly affects people over the age of 60 and is rare in people under 40. Children are almost never affected. In chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), the spongy material found inside some bones (bone marrow) produces too many white blood cells called lymphocytes that aren't fully developed and don't work properly. Over time this can cause a range of problems, such as an increased risk of picking up infections, persistent tiredness, swollen glands in the neck, armpits or groin, and unusual bleeding or bruising. CLL is different from other types of leukaemia, including chronic myeloid leukaemia, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and acute myeloid leukaemia. This page covers: Symptoms of CLL Treatments for CLL Outlook for CLL Causes of CLL Support groups and charities Symptoms of CLL CLL doesn't usually cause any symptoms early on and may only be picked up during a blood test carried out for another reason. When symptoms develop, they may include: getting infections often anaemia \u2013 persistent tiredness, shortness of breath and pale skin bleeding and bruising more easily than normal a high temperature (fever) night sweats swollen glands in your neck, armpits or groin swelling and discomfort in your tummy unintentional weight loss You should visit your GP if you have any persistent or worrying symptoms. These symptoms can have other causes other than cancer, but it's a good idea to get them checked out. Read more about diagnosing CLL and complications of CLL. Treatments for CLL As CLL progresses slowly and often has no symptoms at first, you may not need to be treated immediately. If it's caught early on, you'll have regular check-ups over the following months or years to see if it's getting any worse. If CLL starts to cause symptoms, or isn't diagnosed until later on, the main treatments are: chemotherapy \u2013 where medication taken as a tablet or given directly into a vein is used to destroy the cancerous cells a stem cell or bone marrow transplant \u2013 where donated cells called stem cells are transplanted into your body so you start to produce healthy white blood cells Treatment can't usually cure CLL completely, but can slow its progression and lead to periods where there are no symptoms. Treatment may be repeated if the condition comes back. Read more about treating CLL. Outlook for CLL The outlook for CLL depends on how advanced it is when it's diagnosed, how old you are when diagnosed, and your general health. Younger, healthier people who are diagnosed when CLL is still in the early stages generally have the best outlook. Although it can't normally be cured, treatment can help control the condition for many years. Overall, around three in every four people with CLL will live at least five years after diagnosis, but this can range from 10 years or more if caught early on, to less than a year if caught at a very advanced stage. Causes of CLL It's not clear what causes CLL. There's no proven link with radiation or chemical exposure, diet or infections. You can't catch it from anyone else or pass it on. However, having certain genes can increase your chances of developing CLL. You may be at a slightly higher risk of it if you have a close family member with it, although this risk is still small. Support groups and charities Living with a serious and long-term condition such as CLL can be very difficult. You may find it useful to find out as much as you can about the condition and speak to others affected by it. The following support groups and charities can offer help and advice for people CLL, their families and their carers: Bloodwise Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia Support Association (CLLSA) Leukaemia CARE Lymphoma Association The Macmillan Cancer Support and Cancer Research UK websites are also good places for CLL information and support. Page last reviewed: 22\/03\/2016 Next review due: 22\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 124 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bone marrow transplant Chemotherapy Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Macmillan: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia Support Association Bloodwise: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Leukaemia CARE: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Lymphoma Association: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chronic myeloid leukaemia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leukaemia-chronic","content":"Chronic myeloid leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic myeloid leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leukaemia-chronic Clinical trials Leukaemia-chronic Community Chronic myeloid leukaemia Leukaemia-chronic Symptoms Leukaemia-chronic Causes Leukaemia-chronic Diagnosis Leukaemia-chronic Treatment Leukaemia-chronic Complications Introduction  Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. Chronic leukaemia means the condition progresses slowly over many years. Chronic leukaemia is classified according to the type of white blood cells that are affected by cancer. There are two main types: lymphocytes \u2013 mostly used to fight viral infections myeloid cells \u2013 which perform a number of different functions, such as fighting bacterial infections, defending the body against parasites and preventing the spread of tissue damage These pages focus on chronic myeloid leukaemia, which is a cancer of the myeloid cells. The following other types of leukaemia are covered elsewhere: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia acute myeloid leukaemia acute lymphoblastic leukaemia What happens in chronic leukaemia Your bone marrow produces stem cells. These are unique cells because they have the ability to develop into three important types of blood cell: red blood cells \u2013 which carry oxygen around the body white blood cells \u2013 which help fight infection platelets \u2013 which help stop bleeding In leukaemia, a genetic mutation in the the stem cells causes a huge over-production of white blood cells and corresponding drop in red blood cells and platelets. It's this lack of red blood cells which causes symptoms of anaemia, such as tiredness, and the lack of platelets that increases the risk of excessive bleeding. Warning signs of chronic myeloid leukaemia In its early stages, chronic myeloid leukaemia usually causes no noticeable symptoms. As the condition develops, symptoms include: tiredness  weight loss  night sweats a feeling of bloating bruising  bone pain  Read more about the symptoms of chronic myeloid leukaemia.  How common is chronic myeloid leukaemia? Chronic myeloid leukaemia is quite a rare type of cancer. Around 8,600 people are diagnosed with leukaemia every year in the UK. In 2011, around 680 people in the UK were diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukaemia. Chronic myeloid leukaemia can affect people of any age, but it is more common in people aged 40-60. There is no evidence that it runs in families. Outlook The outlook for chronic myeloid leukaemia depends to a large extent on how well a person responds to medication. Most patients (60-65%) do well on imatinib tablets, which are taken every day for life. For those who don't do well on imatinib, more than half respond to one of the alternative drugs. Nilotinib is recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for patients with chronic myeloid leukaemia who are not responding to, or can't tolerate imantinib. Those who fail these drugs or cannot tolerate them may be offered a bone marrow transplant, if this is a suitable treatment. Read more about the treatment of chronic myeloid leukaemia. If the condition is diagnosed early (the chronic phase), the outlook is excellent, with almost 90% of people living at least five years after diagnosis. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 18\/08\/2014 Next review due: 18\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 108 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Acute myeloid leukaemia Stem cell transplant Find cancer support services External links Bloodwise: CML Leukaemia CARE: CML CML Support Macmillan: CML Cancer Research UK: CML My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease","content":"Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Real stories Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Clinical trials Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Community Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Symptoms Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Causes Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Diagnosis Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Treatment Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Living with Introduction  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the name for a collection of lung diseases including chronic bronchitis, emphysema and chronic obstructive airways disease. People with COPD have difficulties breathing, primarily due to the narrowing of their airways, this is called airflow obstruction. Typical symptoms of COPD include: increasing breathlessness when active a persistent cough with phlegm frequent chest infections Read more about the symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Why does COPD happen? The main cause of COPD is smoking. The likelihood of developing COPD increases the more you smoke and the longer you've been smoking. This is because smoking irritates and inflames the lungs, which results in scarring. Over many years, the inflammation leads to permanent changes in the lung. The walls of the airways thicken and more mucus is produced. Damage to the delicate walls of the air sacs in the lungs causes emphysema and the lungs lose their normal elasticity. The smaller airways also become scarred and narrowed. These changes cause the symptoms of breathlessness, cough and phlegm associated with COPD. Some cases of COPD are caused by fumes, dust, air pollution and genetic disorders, but these are rarer. Read more about the causes of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Who is affected? COPD is one of the most common respiratory diseases in the UK. It usually only starts to affect people over the age of 35, although most people are not diagnosed until they are in their 50s. It is thought there are more than 3 million people living with the disease in the UK, of which only about 900,000 have been diagnosed. This is because many people who develop symptoms of COPD do not get medical help because they often dismiss their symptoms as a \u2018smoker\u2019s cough\u2019. COPD affects more men than women, although rates in women are increasing. Diagnosis It is important that COPD is diagnosed as early as possible so treatment can be used to try to slow down the deterioration of your lungs. You should see your GP if you have any of the symptoms mentioned above. COPD is usually diagnosed after a consultation with your doctor, which may be followed by breathing tests. Read more about diagnosing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Treating COPD Although the damage that has already occurred to your lungs cannot be reversed, you can slow down the progression of the disease. Stopping smoking is particularly effective at doing this. Treatments for COPD usually involve relieving the symptoms with medication, for example by using an inhaler to make breathing easier. Pulmonary rehabilitation may also help increase the amount of exercise you are capable of doing. Surgery is only an option for a small number of people with COPD. Read more about treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Living with COPD COPD can affect your life in many ways, but help is available to reduce its impact. Simple steps such as living in a healthy way, being as active as possible, learning breathing techniques, and taking your medication can help you to reduce the symptoms of COPD. Financial support and advice about relationships and end of life care is also available for people with COPD. Read more about living with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Want to know more? British Lung Foundation: COPD Can COPD be prevented? Although COPD causes about 25,000 deaths a year in the UK, severe COPD can usually be prevented by making changes to your lifestyle. If you smoke, stopping is the single most effective way to reduce your risk of getting the condition. Research has shown you are up to four times more likely to succeed in giving up smoking if you use NHS support along with stop-smoking medicines such as patches or gum. Ask your doctor about this, call the NHS Smoking Helpline on 0300 123 1044 or go to the NHS Smokefree website. Also avoid exposure to tobacco smoke as much as possible. Want to know more? Find your local stop-smoking service Page last reviewed: 01\/10\/2014 Next review due: 01\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1517 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 783  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 403  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 108  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful COPD Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the name for a collection of lung diseases, including chronic bronchitis, emphysema and chronic obstructive airways disease. It affects an estimated 3 million people in the UK. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Shortness of breath Stop smoking Find stop smoking support External links COPD Decision Aid NHS Smokefree British Lung Foundation NICE: COPD Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"COPD community","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease\/Pages\/Community.aspx","content":"Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - Community - NHS Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories COPD - Community  Overview Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Real stories Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Clinical trials Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Community   Community content from HealthUnlocked Useful links NHS Choices links Shortness of breath Stop smoking Find stop smoking support External links COPD Decision Aid NHS Smokefree British Lung Foundation NICE: COPD NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chronic pancreatitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Pancreatitis-chronic\/Pages\/Introduction.aspx","content":"Chronic pancreatitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic pancreatitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pancreatitis-chronic Real stories Pancreatitis-chronic Clinical trials Chronic pancreatitis Pancreatitis-chronic Symptoms Pancreatitis-chronic Causes Pancreatitis-chronic Diagnosis Pancreatitis-chronic Treatment Pancreatitis-chronic Complications Introduction  Chronic pancreatitis is a condition where the pancreas (a small organ located behind the stomach and below the ribcage) becomes permanently damaged from inflammation. It's different to acute pancreatitis, where the inflammation is only short-term. The most common symptom of chronic pancreatitis is repeated episodes of abdominal (tummy) pain, which can be severe. Other symptoms tend to develop as the damage to the pancreas progresses, such as producing greasy, foul-smelling stools. Read more about the symptoms of chronic pancreatitis and diagnosing chronic pancreatitis. When to seek medical advice Always visit your GP if you're experiencing severe pain \u2013 it's a warning sign that something is wrong. Why it happens Long-term alcohol misuse is responsible for around 7 out of every 10 cases of chronic pancreatitis. This is because heavy drinking over a number of years can repeatedly damage the pancreas. Less common causes include: smoking a problem with the immune system, causing it to attack the pancreas an inherited genetic mutation disrupting the functions of the pancreas In as many as 3 out of 10 people with the condition, the cause cannot be identified \u2013 this is known as \"idiopathic\" chronic pancreatitis. Read more about the causes of chronic pancreatitis. Who's affected Chronic pancreatitis can affect people of any age, but is most common in middle-aged men aged between 45 and 54. Between 2012 and 2013, over 35,000 people visited hospitals in England with the condition. How it's treated In most cases of chronic pancreatitis, there's no specific treatment to reduce the inflammation and repair the damage to the pancreas. Treatment mainly focuses on lifestyle changes (see below) and medication to relieve the pain. Surgery is sometimes needed to treat severe chronic pain that doesn't respond to painkillers. However, the pain can be difficult to treat and can seriously affect your quality of life. People who don't smoke cigarettes and avoid drinking alcohol tend to experience less pain and live longer than those who continue to drink and smoke after receiving a diagnosis. Read more about treating chronic pancreatitis. Complications Living with chronic pain can cause mental as well as physical strain. It's important to speak to your GP if you're experiencing stress, anxiety or depression caused by chronic pancreatitis. Diabetes is a common complication of chronic pancreatitis and affects about a third of people with the condition. It occurs when the pancreas is damaged and unable to produce insulin. People with chronic pancreatitis also have an increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer. Read more about the possible complications of chronic pancreatitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/03\/2015 Next review due: 05\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 132 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol misuse Diabetes Acute pancreatitis Pancreatic cancer Drinking and alcohol External links CORE charity NICE guidance: autologous pancreatic islet cell transplantation for improved glycaemic control after pancreatectomy The risks of drinking too much You don't have to be an alcoholic to risk damaging your health. Regularly drinking just above recommended levels can be harmful NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chronic traumatic encephalopathy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/chronic-traumatic-encephalopathy","content":"Chronic traumatic encephalopathy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic traumatic encephalopathy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a type of dementia associated with repeated blows to the head and recurrent episodes of concussion. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy is particularly associated with contact sports, such as boxing or American football. Most of the available studies are based on ex-athletes. It was previously known as \"punch drunk\" syndrome and dementia pugilistica. However, these terms are no longer used as it's now known that the condition isn't confined to ex-boxers. There's still some debate about how widespread chronic traumatic encephalopathy is and how it should be diagnosed. Currently, there are only supportive treatments available and research is focused on finding a reliable technique to diagnose the condition. This topic covers: Symptoms Causes When to seek medical advice Diagnosis Treatment Prevention Symptoms of CTE The symptoms of chronic traumatic encephalopathy may be similar to those seen in other types of dementia, particularly Alzheimer's disease. Symptoms typically begin gradually several years after receiving repetitive blows to the head or repeated concussions. They may include: short-term memory loss \u2013 such as asking the same question several times, or having difficulty remembering names or phone numbers changes in mood \u2013 such as frequent mood swings, depression, and feeling increasingly anxious, frustrated or agitated increasing confusion and disorientation \u2013 for example, getting lost, wandering, or not knowing what time of day it is difficulty thinking \u2013 such as finding it hard to make decisions As the condition progresses, further symptoms may include: slurred speech (dysarthria) significant problems with memory parkinsonism \u2013 the typical symptoms of Parkinson's disease, including tremor, slow movement and muscle stiffness difficulty eating or swallowing (dysphagia) \u2013 although this is rare Read more about the symptoms of dementia. Causes of CTE Any prolonged activity that involves repeated blows to the head or recurrent episodes of concussion is thought to increase the risk of chronic traumatic encephalopathy. However, chronic traumatic encephalopathy and concussion are separate conditions. Many people who are concussed don't go on to develop the condition, but evidence suggests a pattern of recurrent minor head injuries increases the risk. Although the exact causes aren't fully understood, certain groups of people are believed to be most at risk, including: athletes with a history of repetitive mild traumatic brain injury \u2013 particularly in contact sports, such as boxing or martial arts, American football, football (perhaps related to repeatedly heading the ball) and rugby military veterans with a history of repeated head trauma \u2013 such as blast injuries people with a history of repeated head injuries \u2013 including self-injury, victims of recurrent assault, or poorly controlled epilepsy that results in recurrent head trauma When to seek medical advice If you're worried about your memory or think you may have dementia, it's a good idea to see your GP. If you're worried about someone else, you should encourage them to make an appointment and perhaps suggest that you go along with them. Memory problems aren't just caused by dementia \u2013 they can also be caused by: depression stress medications other health problems Your GP can carry out some simple checks to try to find out what the cause may be, and they can refer you to a specialist memory clinic for more tests, if necessary. Read about when to seek medical advice for: symptoms of concussion symptoms of a minor head injury Diagnosing CTE As chronic traumatic encephalopathy shares many features with other neurodegenerative conditions, there's currently no test available to diagnose the condition. A diagnosis is usually based on a history of participating in contact sports, symptoms and clinical features. Your GP will talk to you about the problems you're experiencing and may ask you to perform some simple mental or physical tasks, such as moving or walking around, to help with the diagnosis. Your GP may refer you to a specialist memory assessment service, staffed by experts in diagnosing, caring for and advising people with dementia, and their families. Memory clinic staff can listen to your concerns, assess your skills and, if necessary, arrange further tests to rule out other conditions. Currently, the most reliable way of confirming a diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy is to examine a person's brain during an autopsy (an examination of the body after death) for certain changes. These changes may not show up on routine brain scans or may occur in other conditions, which is why it can be difficult to confirm a diagnosis in life. Research has found that the changes in the brain associated with chronic traumatic encephalopathy are different from those seen in Alzheimer's disease. However, both conditions are associated with shrinking of the brain (atrophy) and the presence of neurofibrillary tangles that contain a protein called tau. The most widely used test used for investigating neurodegenerative disorders is a magnetic resonance image (MRI) scan or computerised tomography (CT) scan. Research is ongoing to determine whether other brain imaging techniques will be able to help diagnose chronic traumatic encephalopathy in the future. Read more about: diagnosing concussion tests for diagnosing dementia what to do if you've just been diagnosed with dementia Treating CTE As with many other types of dementia, treatment for chronic traumatic encephalopathy is based around supportive treatments. If you've been diagnosed with the condition, healthcare professionals, such as your GP or specialist, and social care services (normally your local council working with the NHS) will usually both be involved in helping draw up and carry out a long-term care plan. You may also see a speech and language therapist or occupational therapist. Read more about care plans for long-term conditions. Dementia Choices provides detailed information for people with dementia and their families, including: help and support for people with dementia staying independent with dementia looking after someone with dementia dementia, social services and the NHS It may also be helpful to get in touch with a local or national Alzheimer's or dementia support group, such as the Alzheimer's Society, for more information and advice. Preventing CTE The only known way to prevent chronic traumatic encephalopathy is to avoid repetitive head injuries. Although many head injuries are difficult to predict or avoid, there are ways to reduce your risk. For example: wearing the recommended protective equipment during a contact sport following your doctor's recommendations about returning to play  after concussion making sure any contact sport you or your child are taking part in is supervised by a properly qualified and trained person seeking medical advice if any symptoms of a previous head injury return Read about: preventing minor head injuries  preventing concussion Page last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 0 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alzheimer's disease Concussion Dementia guide Looking after someone with dementia External links Alzheimer's Research UK Alzheimer's Society Dementia UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): dementia All about dementia Worried about memory loss? If you're over the age of 65, it may be a good idea to talk to your GP about the early signs of dementia Living well with dementia Things you can do to live healthy and well with a dementia diagnosis Worried someone has dementia? If someone you know is becoming increasingly forgetful, encourage them to see their GP NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Churg\u2013Strauss syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vasculitis\/Pages\/Introduction.aspx#Churg","content":"Vasculitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vasculitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vasculitis Introduction  Vasculitis literally means 'inflammation of the blood vessels'. Inflammation is your immune system's response to tissue that has become injured or infected. Damaged cells release chemicals that cause blood vessels to leak fluid into the tissues, causing tissue swelling. If there's an infection, this helps isolate the invading germ.  In vasculitis, your immune system attacks the blood vessels by mistake. The trigger may be an infection, a medicine or another medical condition. Sometimes, however, the cause isn't clear. It leads to swollen blood vessel walls and narrowed blood vessels. Blood flow to tissues and organs is reduced or blocked. If the blood vessel wall becomes weak, bleeding can occur. Any blood vessel can become inflamed like this, from large arteries (\"arteritis\") to small blood vessels, in any place in the body. The larger the blood vessels affected, the more damage there may be. All these variables mean there are many possible types of vasculitis, each with different symptoms and potential complications. These are covered below (ordered by size of the affected blood vessels): Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis) Polymyalgia rheumatica  Takayasu arteritis  Polyarteritis nodosa  Kawasaki disease Granulomatosis with polyangiitis  Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis  Microscopic polyangiitis Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura  Less common types  These types of vasculitis are briefly explained below, with links taking you to more detailed information. Giant cell arteritis Giant cell arteritis is an age-related condition in which medium and large arteries, usually in the head and neck, become inflamed. It's sometimes called \"temporal arteritis\", because the arteries around the temples are often affected. Symptoms of giant cell arteritis include: aching and soreness around the temples jaw muscle pain while eating vision loss It tends to only affect adults over the age of 50, and the cause is unclear. The main treatment is steroid medication (usually prednisolone), which is given promptly when the diagnosis is suspected.  Read more about giant cell arteritis. Polymyalgia rheumatica  Polymyalgia rheumatica is another age-related condition closely related to giant cell arteritis. It causes pain, stiffness and inflammation in the muscles around the shoulders, neck and hips. It may also cause more general symptoms, such as a fever, extreme tiredness, loss of appetite, weight loss and depression. The condition is two to three times more common in women than men, and most people diagnosed with it are over 70 years old. The cause is unclear.  The main treatment is usually prednisolone (a steroid medication), which is usually used in lower doses than for giant cell arteritis.  Read more about polymyalgia rheumatica. Takayasu arteritis Takayasu arteritis is rare in the UK. The main artery from the heart is affected, along with the major arteries branching off this. These arteries gradually narrow over time, which reduces the blood supply to the limbs and other parts of the body. Treatment is usually steroid medication. Read information about Takayasu arteritis from Vasculitis UK. Polyarteritis nodosa Polyarteritis nodosa is a rare form of vasculitis, in which the medium or smaller arteries become damaged and inflamed. It particularly affects the arteries supplying the gut, kidneys and nerves. Sometimes, only part of the artery wall is affected, which becomes weak and may bulge, forming an aneurysm. If this leaks or ruptures, it can cause serious internal bleeding. Polyarteritis nodosa can also affect the whole wall of the artery at a particular point, and cause a blockage. The condition is potentially very serious. Typical symptoms are feeling unwell with fever, skin rashes, tummy aches, nerve damage and weight loss. Polyarteritis nodosa can sometimes be triggered by an infection, but the exact cause is uncertain. Read information about polyarteritis nodosa from the Great Ormond Street Hospital website. Kawasaki disease Kawasaki disease is a rare condition that affects small and medium arteries in children under the age of five.  The characteristic symptoms of Kawasaki disease are a high temperature that lasts for more than five days, with a rash, swollen glands in the neck, red fingers or toes, red eyes and redness of the lips, tongue or mouth. Kawasaki disease can affect the coronary arteries (the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart), so some children with Kawasaki disease experience heart complications. The trigger is thought to be an infection, although the exact cause is not fully understood. The affected child will usually need to be managed in hospital, because of the risk of complications \u2013 they will need to be carefully assessed for heart problems and treated with immunoglobulins and aspirin. Read more about Kawasaki disease. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener\u2019s granulomatosis)  Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is an uncommon disorder that mainly affects the blood vessels in the nose, sinuses, ears, lungs and kidneys. It can cause a wide range of symptoms, including fever, night sweats, sinusitis, nosebleeds and crusting of the nose, shortness of breath, coughing up blood and kidney impairment. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a serious condition that can be fatal if left untreated, because it can lead to tissue damage and organ failure. High doses of drugs are needed to dampen down the immune system and bring the inflammation under control. Typically, it is treated with steroid medications (prednisone) and cyclophosphamide \u2013 a cancer drug that suppresses the immune system. Read more about granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg\u2013Strauss syndrome) Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a type of vasculitis that typically causes allergic sinusitis and asthma to develop in adults. It mainly affects adults aged 30-45. Many of the other symptoms are general and include fever, muscle and joint aches, tiredness, loss of appetite and weight loss. The condition can also affect the nerves, causing weakness, pins and needles or numbness, and it sometimes damages the heart muscle. Read information about Eosinophilic granulomatosis from Vasculitis UK. Microscopic polyangiitis Microscopic polyangiitis is another rare and potentially serious long-term vasculitis. Inflammation of the blood vessel walls may affect any organ, but particularly the lungs, kidneys and nervous system. It can lead to raised blood pressure, kidney impairment, anaemia, breathlessness and coughing up blood.  Read information from the Oxford University Hospitals NHS website about microscopic polyangiitis. Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura (HSP) Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) is a rare condition, usually seen in children, which results in a skin rash and joint and tummy pain. It can follow a recent infection. Inflammation of the blood vessels can cause the small surface blood vessels to bleed into the skin, which results in a characteristic rash (purpura). Joint pain is also common. HSP can also affect blood vessels in the bowel and the kidneys, and can cause tummy pain and visible blood in the urine or stools. HSP usually gets better without treatment and is not usually serious. Read more about Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Less common types of vasculitis  Behçet's disease \u2013 typically results in mouth ulcers and genital ulcers, and is more common in people from Greece, Turkey, the Middle East, China and Japan Buerger's disease (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 affects vessels in the legs and arms, leading to reduced blood flow to the hands and feet Primary angiitis of the central nervous system (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 inflammation of the brain's blood vessels Cogan's Syndrome (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 inflammation of the inner ears and eyes Cryoglobulin-associated vasculitis (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 associated with cryoglobulins (proteins in the blood that stick together in the cold); can cause a rash on the lower limbs, joint pain or arthritis, nerve damage, abdominal pain and kidney failure Hypersensitivity vasculitis (links to Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 most commonly caused by sensitivity to a drug such as penicillin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or the contraceptive pill, and results in a skin rash  Vasculitis caused by rheumatoid arthritis (links to the National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society) The links take you to more information on these rarer types of vasculitis. Arm of a 56-year-old woman with small vessel vasculitis (inflammation of the capillaries)  Why you should avoid smoking Smoking makes the blood vessels become even narrower than they already are, and can therefore make vasculitis symptoms worse. Get help now to stop smoking. Page last reviewed: 23\/09\/2014 Next review due: 23\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 69 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Giant cell arteritis Polymyalgia rheumatica Kawasaki disease Granulomatosis with polyangiitis Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura External links Vasculitis UK Corticosteroids Corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medicines prescribed to treat a wide range of health conditions NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Circumcision in adults","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Circumcision","content":"Circumcision in adults - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Circumcision in adults  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Circumcision Clinical trials Circumcision Introduction  Male circumcision is the surgical removal of the foreskin. The foreskin is the retractable fold of skin that covers the end of the penis. It\u2019s a continuation of the skin that covers the whole penis. This page focuses on circumcision for medical reasons in adults and covers: medical reasons for circumcision, including tight foreskin the procedure  recovering from a circumcision  risks of a circumcision  Read about circumcision for medical reasons in children. Why circumcision is carried out Circumcision may be carried out for: medical reasons \u2013 in adult men, circumcision is most commonly carried out when the foreskin is tight and won\u2019t retract (pull back); this is known as phimosis; however, alternative treatments, such as topical steroids, are sometimes preferred religious and cultural reasons \u2013 circumcision is a common practice in the Jewish and Islamic communities, and it's also practised by many African communities (most cultural circumcisions are carried out on children) HIV prevention \u2013 there's evidence that circumcision reduces the risk of heterosexual men acquiring HIV, and in some African countries with high rates of HIV, it's encouraged as part of HIV prevention programmes Medical reasons to have a circumcision In adults, circumcision is sometimes considered a possible treatment option for the following conditions: tight foreskin (phimosis) \u2013 where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis (glans); this can sometimes cause pain when the penis is erect and, in rare cases, passing urine may be difficult recurrent balanitis \u2013 where the foreskin and head of the penis become inflamed and infected paraphimosis \u2013 where the foreskin can't be returned to its original position after being pulled back, causing the head of the penis to become swollen and painful; immediate treatment is needed to avoid serious complications, such as restricted blood flow to the penis balanitis xerotica obliterans \u2013 a condition that causes phimosis and, in some cases, also affects the head of the penis, which can become scarred and inflamed cancer of the penis \u2013 a very rare type of cancer that can occur in adult men, where a red patch, wart-like growth, or ulcer appears on the end of penis or under the foreskin In most cases, circumcision will only be recommended when other, less invasive and less risky treatments have been tried and haven't worked. Mild cases of phimosis can be treated with topical steroids to help soften the skin and make it easier for the foreskin to retract. In paraphimosis, a healthcare professional may rub a local anaesthetic gel on to the glans to help reduce pain and inflammation. They may then apply pressure to the head of the penis while pushing the foreskin forward. In severe cases, local anaesthetic gel can be applied to the penis and a small slit made in the foreskin to help relieve the pressure. Balanitis and balanitis xerotica obliterans can sometimes be successfully treated using corticosteroid ointment, gel or cream, antibiotic creams or antifungal creams. The three main treatment options for penile cancer are:   surgery to remove the cancerous cells (and sometimes the surrounding tissue) radiotherapy chemotherapy   If you're considering circumcision for a medical reason, it's worth discussing alternative treatment options with your GP or specialist. HIV prevention There's evidence from several trials carried out in Africa that circumcised men have a lower risk of acquiring HIV from infected women. However, it\u2019s unclear whether male circumcision can help prevent other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). There have been several studies into male circumcision and the risk of other STIs, but the evidence to date has been inconclusive and conflicting. The procedure Circumcision is usually carried out on a day-patient basis. This means you\u2019ll be admitted to hospital on the same day you have surgery and you won't have to stay overnight. You\u2019ll be asked not to eat and drink for six hours before surgery if you're having a general anaesthetic. After you\u2019ve been admitted to hospital, you\u2019ll be seen by the members of the medical team carrying out the procedure, including your surgeon and anaesthetist. This is a good opportunity to discuss any concerns you have and ask questions about anything you\u2019re not sure about. You'll be asked to sign a consent form to confirm you agree to the surgery. You'll usually either have a general anaesthetic, which means you'll be unconscious throughout the procedure, or a local anaesthetic injection, which will numb your penis and the surrounding area. In some cases, a spinal anaesthetic, where you\u2019re unable to feel anything below your waist, will be used. Read more about the different types of anaesthesia. Circumcision is a relatively simple procedure. The foreskin is removed just behind the head of the penis using a scalpel or surgical scissors. Any bleeding can be cauterised (stopped using heat), and the remaining edges of skin will be stitched together using dissolvable stitches. The British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) has produced a leaflet that outlines the circumcision procedure (PDF, 970kb) in more detail. Recovering after circumcision When you\u2019re discharged from hospital, you\u2019ll be given advice about your recovery at home, including when you can drive, return to work and have sex. It usually takes at least 10 days for your penis to heal after circumcision. You'll probably be advised to take at least one week off work to recover. You don\u2019t need to tell the DVLA if you\u2019ve had a routine circumcision and you don\u2019t have any other medical conditions that affect your ability to drive. However, it\u2019s your responsibility to ensure you\u2019re fit to drive after having surgery. You should avoid having sex for at least four weeks after your operation. Your care team will give you a contact number to call in case you experience any problems or have any concerns. You should also be given details about your follow-up appointment, which may be at the hospital or with your GP. For three or four days after your operation, it\u2019s likely you\u2019ll experience some discomfort and swelling around the head of your penis. Before leaving hospital, you\u2019ll be given painkilling medication, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, to help ease this. However, contact your GP if you have a temperature, increased redness, bleeding, persistent pain or throbbing of your penis, because it could be a sign of infection. Applying petroleum jelly (Vaseline) around the tip of your penis will stop it sticking to your underwear. Wearing light, loose-fitting clothing for two or three days after your operation will also help to avoid irritation to your penis while it heals. You shouldn\u2019t feel any pain or discomfort while passing urine, but contact your medical team if you do. Risks of circumcision In the UK, complications after circumcisions carried out for medical reasons are rare and most men don\u2019t experience any significant problems. Apart from the initial swelling, bleeding and infection are the two most common problems associated with circumcision. There\u2019s between a 1 in 10 and 1 in 50 chance that you\u2019ll experience bleeding or infection. Other possible complications of circumcision can include: permanent reduction in sensation in the head of the penis, particularly during sex  tenderness around the scar the need to remove stitches that haven't dissolved occasionally, another operation is needed to remove some more skin from around the head of the penis Female circumcision The World Health Organization (WHO) states that female circumcision, often referred to as female genital mutilation (or FGM), is recognised internationally as a violation of the human rights of girls and women. It\u2019s also illegal under the Female Genital Mutilation Act (2003). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 22\/01\/2016 Next review due: 22\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 354 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 133  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links HIV and AIDS Syphilis UTIs in children Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Phimosis Find out about phimosis, a condition where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Circumcision in children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Circumcision-in-children","content":"Circumcision in children - NHS Choices - Introduction Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Circumcision in children  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Circumcision in children Introduction  Male circumcision is the surgical removal of the foreskin. The foreskin is the retractable fold of skin that covers the end of the penis. It\u2019s a continuation of the skin that covers the whole penis. This page focuses on circumcision in children for medical reasons and covers: why circumcision is carried out how the foreskin develops  medical reasons for circumcision  the procedure  recovering after a circumcision  risks of circumcision  Read more about circumcision in adults for medical reasons. Why circumcision is carried out Circumcision in children may be carried out for: medical reasons \u2013 for example, as a treatment of last resort for conditions such as tight foreskin (phimosis) and recurrent infection of the foreskin and head of the penis (balanitis) religious or cultural reasons \u2013 it's a common practice in Jewish and Islamic communities, and it's also practised by many African communities (most cultural circumcisions are carried out in children) How the foreskin develops It\u2019s normal for a baby boy\u2019s foreskin not to retract (pull back) for the first few years of life. Around the age of two (or later, in some cases), the foreskin should start to separate naturally from the head of the penis (glans). Full separation occurs in most boys by the age of five years. For some boys, the foreskin can take longer to separate, but this doesn't mean there's a problem \u2013 it will usually just detach at a later stage. As the foreskin starts to separate from the head of the penis, you may see the foreskin \"ballooning out\" when your child passes urine. This can occasionally lead to infection (balanitis) but this ballooning usually settles down with time. Never try to force your child's foreskin back, because it may be painful and damage the foreskin. Medical reasons for circumcision It\u2019s rare for circumcision to be recommended for medical reasons in children. This is because other, less invasive and less risky treatments are usually available. The following conditions affect the penis and, in rare cases, may require a circumcision: tight foreskin (phimosis) \u2013 where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis; this can sometimes cause pain when the penis is erect and, in rare cases, passing urine may be difficult recurrent infection (balanitis) \u2013 where the foreskin and head of the penis become inflamed and infected paraphimosis \u2013 where the foreskin can't be returned to its original position after being pulled back, causing the head of the penis to become swollen and painful; immediate treatment is needed to avoid serious complications, such as restricted blood flow to the penis balanitis xerotica obliterans \u2013 a condition that causes phimosis and, in some cases, also affects the head of the penis, which can become scarred and inflamed repeated urinary tract infections (UTIs) \u2013 in very rare cases, circumcision may be recommended as a treatment of last resort if a child has repeated UTIs These conditions can often be treated successfully with non-surgical treatments, which will often be tried first before circumcision is considered. Mild cases of phimosis can be treated with topical steroids to help soften the skin and make it easier for the foreskin to retract. However, circumcision may be necessary if the foreskin is damaged and won\u2019t slide back over the head of the penis. This is very rare before five years of age. In paraphimosis, a healthcare professional may rub a local anaesthetic gel on to the head of the penis (glans) to help reduce pain and inflammation. They may then apply pressure to the glans while pushing the foreskin forward. In severe cases, local anaesthetic gel can be applied and a small slit made in the foreskin to help relieve the pressure. Balanitis and balanitis xerotica obliterans can sometimes be successfully treated using corticosteroid ointment, gel or cream, antibiotic creams or antifungal creams. Most UTIs are mild and can be treated with antibiotics. However, repeated UTIs can occasionally cause kidney damage. For example, if a boy has a birth defect that causes urine to leak back up into the kidney, bacteria can spread from the foreskin, through urine, and infect the kidney. In such cases, circumcision may be recommended. The procedure Circumcision is usually carried out on a day-patient basis. This means your child will be admitted to hospital on the same day they have surgery and won't need to stay overnight. Your child won\u2019t be able to eat or drink before having surgery \u2013 you\u2019ll receive detailed information in a letter. After being admitted to hospital, your child will be seen by the surgeon who will carry out the procedure. They\u2019ll explain the operation in more detail, discuss any concerns and answer any questions you have. They\u2019ll also ask you to sign a consent form, giving your permission for the operation. The anaesthetist will also visit your child before the operation. Your child will usually have a general anaesthetic, so they\u2019ll be unconscious throughout the procedure and unable to feel any pain or discomfort. Circumcision is a relatively simple procedure. The foreskin is removed just behind the head of the penis using a scalpel or surgical scissors. Any bleeding can be cauterised (stopped using heat). The remaining edges of skin are stitched together using dissolvable stitches. It will take up to six weeks for your child\u2019s penis to fully heal. Recovering after a circumcision After the operation, a dressing will be put over your child\u2019s penis to protect the wound. It will be removed before your child goes home. Your child will be allowed home after he\u2019s passed urine, which may be slightly uncomfortable at first. Your child\u2019s penis will be sore and inflamed for a few days after the operation. Ointment may be prescribed to use for a few days to help the area heal. Your child will also need regular pain relief, in the form of paracetamol or ibuprofen, for at least three days. It may be more comfortable for your child to wear loose clothing (or no clothing at all) on their bottom half for a few days after the operation. Passing urine in the bath or shower may also be more comfortable for them. Your child will be able to have a bath on the day after the operation. He should avoid riding a bicycle or other toys you sit on until after any swelling has gone down. Your child should be able to return to school or nursery about a week after the operation. Make sure you tell the school or nursery about the operation. In most cases, a follow-up appointment won\u2019t be necessary. However, you should contact your GP or hospital care team if: your child\u2019s penis is bleeding your child\u2019s penis is still swollen two weeks after the operation passing urine is still painful a few days after the operation Risks of circumcision The risks associated with circumcisions when carried out by qualified and experienced doctors are small. The main risk is bleeding, both during and after the operation. The surgeon will seal off any bleeding during the procedure, and the dressing applied afterwards will absorb any further bleeding. However, seek medical advice if your child\u2019s penis continues to bleed after they return home. There are also risks associated with general anaesthetic, such as having a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). However, these risks are small. The anaesthetist will explain the risks to you before your child\u2019s operation. You can also read more about the complications and risks of general anaesthetic. Your child may have a headache or feel sick or dizzy after having a general anaesthetic. However, these side effects should pass quickly. There\u2019s also a small risk of infection after having a circumcision. Page last reviewed: 22\/01\/2016 Next review due: 22\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 24 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Balanitis Circumcision in adults Penis health UTIs in children External links BAD: Zoon's balanitis BAUS: tight foreskin (phimosis) Great Ormond Street Hospital - circumcision Phimosis Find out about phimosis, a condition where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cirrhosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cirrhosis","content":"Cirrhosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cirrhosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cirrhosis Real stories Cirrhosis Clinical trials Cirrhosis Community Cirrhosis Cirrhosis Symptoms Cirrhosis Causes Cirrhosis Diagnosis Cirrhosis Treatment Cirrhosis Prevention Introduction  Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver caused by continuous, long-term liver damage. Scar tissue replaces healthy tissue in the liver and prevents the liver from working properly. The damage caused by cirrhosis can't be reversed and can eventually become so extensive that your liver stops functioning. This is called liver failure. Cirrhosis can be fatal if the liver fails. However, it usually takes years for the condition to reach this stage and treatment can help slow its progression. Each year in the UK, around 4,000 people die from cirrhosis and 700 people with the condition need a liver transplant to survive. Signs and symptoms There are usually few symptoms in the early stages of cirrhosis. However, as your liver loses its ability to function properly, you're likely to experience a loss of appetite, nausea and itchy skin. In the later stages, symptoms can include jaundice, vomiting blood, dark, tarry-looking stools, and a build-up of fluid in the legs (oedema) and abdomen (ascites). Read more about the symptoms of cirrhosis. When to see your GP As cirrhosis doesn't have many obvious symptoms during the early stages, it's often picked up during tests for an unrelated illness. See your GP if you have any of the following symptoms: fever and shivering shortness of breath  vomiting blood very dark or black, tarry stools (faeces) periods of confusion or drowsiness Read more about diagnosing cirrhosis. What causes cirrhosis? In the UK, the most common causes of cirrhosis are: drinking too much alcohol (alcohol misuse) over many years being infected with the hepatitis C virus for a long time a condition called non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) that causes excess fat to build up in the liver NASH is on the rise in the UK, due to increasing levels of obesity and reduced physical activity. It's likely that it will overtake alcohol and hepatitis C as the most common cause of cirrhosis. Less common causes of cirrhosis include hepatitis B infection and inherited liver diseases, such as haemochromatosis. Read more about the causes of cirrhosis. Treating cirrhosis There's currently no cure for cirrhosis. However, it's possible to manage the symptoms and any complications, and slow its progression. Treating underlying conditions that may be the cause, such as using anti-viral medication to treat a hepatitis C infection, can also stop cirrhosis getting worse. You may be advised to cut down or stop drinking alcohol, or to lose weight if you're overweight. A wide range of alcohol support services are available. In its more advanced stages, the scarring caused by cirrhosis can make your liver stop functioning. In this case, a liver transplant is the only treatment option. Read more about treating cirrhosis. Preventing cirrhosis Not exceeding the recommended limits for alcohol consumption is the best way of preventing alcohol-related cirrhosis. men and women are advised not to regularly drink more than 14 units a week spread your drinking over three days or more if you drink as much as 14 units a week Read more about alcohol units. Hepatitis B and C are infections you can get by having unprotected sex or sharing needles to inject drugs. Using a condom during sex and not injecting drugs will reduce your risk of developing hepatitis B and C. A vaccine for hepatitis B is available, but there's currently no vaccine for hepatitis C. Read more about preventing cirrhosis. The liver The liver is an important organ, which carries out hundreds of jobs that are vital for sustaining life. For example, it: stores glycogen (a carbohydrate that produces short-term energy) makes bile, which helps to digest fats makes substances that clot the blood processes and removes any alcohol, toxins or drugs Your liver is very tough. It will keep working even if badly damaged, and can continue to repair itself until it's severely damaged. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/04\/2015 Next review due: 15\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 389 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 214  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 103  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol misuse Find support services for alcohol addiction Hepatitis C Liver disease Liver transplant Social drinking risks External links Adfam: support for families Al-Anon: support for families Alcoholics Anonymous Down Your Drink British Liver Trust Lab Tests Online UK: bilirubin PBC Foundation: primary biliary cholangitis The Hepatitis C Trust Alcohol support Realising you have a problem with alcohol is the first step to getting better, but it's often the hardest one Find and choose services for Cirrhosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CJD","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease","content":"Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Clinical trials Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Symptoms Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Causes Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Diagnosis Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Treatment Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Prevention Introduction  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a rare and fatal condition that affects the brain. It causes brain damage that worsens rapidly over time. Symptoms of CJD include: loss of intellect and memory change in personality loss of balance and co-ordination slurred speech vision problems and blindness abnormal jerking movements progressive loss of brain function and mobility Most people with CJD will die within a year of the symptoms starting, usually from infection. This is because the immobility caused by CJD can make people with the condition vulnerable to infection. Read more about the symptoms of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and diagnosing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. What causes CJD? CJD appears to be caused by an abnormal infectious protein called a prion. These prions accumulate at high levels in the brain and cause irreversible damage to nerve cells, resulting in the symptoms described above. While the abnormal prions are technically infectious, they're very different to viruses and bacteria. For example, prions aren't destroyed by the extremes of heat and radiation used to kill bacteria and viruses, and antibiotics or antiviral medicines have no effect on them. Read more about the causes of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Types of CJD There are four main types of CJD, which are described below. Sporadic CJD Sporadic CJD is the most common type. The precise cause of sporadic CJD is unclear, but it's been suggested that a normal brain protein changes abnormally ('misfolds') and turns into a prion. Most cases of sporadic CJD occur in adults aged between 45 and 75. On average, symptoms develop at age 60-65 years. Despite being the most common type of CJD, sporadic CJD is still very rare, affecting only one or two people in every million each year in the UK. In the UK during 2014, there were 90 recorded deaths from sporadic CJD. Variant CJD Variant CJD is likely to be caused by consuming meat from a cow that had bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or 'mad cow disease'), a similar prion disease to CJD. Since the link between variant CJD and BSE was discovered in 1996, strict controls have proved very effective in preventing meat from infected cattle from entering the food chain (see preventing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease for more information). However, the average time it takes for the symptoms of variant CJD to occur after initial infection (the incubation period) is still unclear. The incubation period could be very long (over 10 years) in some people, so those exposed to infected meat before the food controls were introduced can still develop variant CJD. The prion that causes variant CJD can also be transmitted by blood transfusion, although this has only happened four times in the UK. There have been 177 recorded cases of variant CJD in the UK to date and there were no recorded deaths from the condition in the UK during 2014. Familial or inherited CJD Familial CJD is a very rare genetic condition where one of the genes a person inherits from their parent (the prion protein gene) carries a mutation that causes prions to form in their brain during adulthood, triggering the symptoms of CJD. It affects about 1 in every 9 million people in the UK. The symptoms of familial CJD usually first develop in the early 50s. In the UK during 2014, there were 10 deaths from familial CJD and similar inherited prion diseases. Iatrogenic CJD Iatrogenic CJD is where the infection is accidentally spread from someone with CJD through medical or surgical treatment. For example, a common cause of iatrogenic CJD in the past was growth hormone treatment using human pituitary growth hormones extracted from deceased individuals, some of whom were infected with CJD. Synthetic versions of human growth hormone have been used since 1985, so this is no longer a risk. Iatrogenic CJD can also occur if instruments used during brain surgery on a person with CJD aren't properly cleaned between each surgical procedure and are re-used on another person. However, increased awareness of these risks means iatrogenic CJD is now very rare. In the UK during 2014, there were just three deaths from iatrogenic CJD (caused by receiving human growth hormone before 1985). How CJD is treated There's currently no cure for CJD, so treatment aims to relieve symptoms and make the affected person feel as comfortable as possible. This can include using medication such as antidepressants to help with anxiety and depression, and painkillers to relieve pain. Some people will need nursing care and assistance with feeding. Read more about treating Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Information about you If you have CJD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Variant CJD compensation scheme In October 2001, the government announced a compensation scheme for UK victims of variant CJD. A trust fund was set up in April 2001 and payments of £25,000 were made available to most affected families. Page last reviewed: 21\/07\/2015 Next review due: 21\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 167 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and Support End of life care Living with a long-term condition External links National Prion Clinic National CJD Surveillance Unit CJD Support Network CJD Foundation Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Claustrophobia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/claustrophobia","content":"Claustrophobia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Claustrophobia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Claustrophobia is the irrational fear of confined spaces. It's normal to fear being trapped when there's a genuine threat, but people with claustrophobia become fearful in situations where there's no obvious or realistic danger. They'll go out of their way to avoid confined spaces, such as lifts, tunnels, tube trains and public toilets (see below for a full list). However, avoiding these places often reinforces the fear. Some people with claustrophobia experience mild anxiety when in a confined space, while others have severe anxiety or a panic attack. The most common experience is a feeling or fear of losing control. It's estimated that around 10% of the UK population are affected by claustrophobia during their lifetime. This topic covers: Triggers of claustrophobia Symptoms of claustrophobia What causes claustrophobia? Treating claustrophobia Coping with a panic attack Help and support Triggers of claustrophobia Many different situations or feelings can trigger claustrophobia. Even thinking about certain situations without exposure to them could be a trigger. Common triggers of claustrophobia include: lifts tunnels tube trains revolving doors public toilets cars with central locking car washes shop changing rooms hotel rooms with sealed windows planes If you've felt anxious during the last six months about being in a confined space or crowded place, or if you've avoided these situations for this reason, it's likely that you're affected by claustrophobia. MRI scan anxiety If you have claustrophobia and you need to have an MRI scan, let the staff at the hospital know before the day of your appointment. They may be able to give you a mild sedative, or advise you to speak to your GP for a prescription. In some cases, you may be able to attend an open or upright MRI centre, designed for people with severe MRI anxiety. However, these clinics are often only available privately. Symptoms of claustrophobia Panic attacks are common among people with claustrophobia. They can be very frightening and distressing and symptoms often occur without warning. As well as overwhelming feelings of anxiety, a panic attack can also cause physical symptoms, such as: sweating trembling hot flushes or chills shortness of breath or difficulty breathing a choking sensation rapid heartbeat (tachycardia) chest pain or a feeling of tightness in the chest a sensation of butterflies in the stomach nausea headaches and dizziness feeling faint numbness or pins and needles dry mouth  a need to go to the toilet ringing in your ears feeling confused or disorientated If you have severe claustrophobia, you may also experience psychological symptoms such as: fear of losing control fear of fainting feelings of dread fear of dying What causes claustrophobia? Claustrophobia is often caused by a traumatic event experienced during early childhood. For example, adults may develop claustrophobia if, as a child, they: were trapped or kept in a confined space were bullied or abused had a parent with claustrophobia Claustrophobia can also be triggered by unpleasant experiences or situations, such as turbulence when flying or being stuck in a tube tunnel between stations. A child growing up with a parent who has claustrophobia may develop claustrophobia themselves, by associating confined spaces with their parent's anxiety and feeling helpless to comfort the person they loved. Treating claustrophobia Most people with a phobia are fully aware that they have one. Many people live with claustrophobia without having it formally diagnosed and take great care to avoid confined spaces. However, getting help from your GP and a specialist with expertise in behavioural therapy, such as a psychologist, can often be beneficial. Claustrophobia can be successfully treated and cured by gradually being exposed to the situation that causes your fear. This is known as desensitisation or self-exposure therapy. You could try this yourself using self-help techniques, or you could do it with the help of a professional.  Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is often very effective for people with phobias. CBT is a talking therapy that explores your thoughts, feelings and behaviour and develops practical ways of effectively dealing with your phobia. Speak to your GP to find out if CBT would be suitable for you and whether it's available on the NHS in your area. Read more about accessing therapy on the NHS. Coping with a panic attack If possible, stay where you are during a panic attack. It could last up to an hour, so, if you're driving, you may need to pull over and park where it's safe to do so. Don't rush to a place of safety. During the attack, remind yourself that the frightening thoughts and sensations are a sign of panic and will eventually pass. Focus on something non-threatening and visible, such as the time passing on your watch, or items in a supermarket. The symptoms of a panic attack usually peak within 10 minutes, with most attacks lasting between five minutes and half an hour. Read more advice about coping with a panic attack. Help and support Charities, such as Anxiety Alliance and Anxiety Care UK, are useful sources of information and advice about how to effectively manage anxiety and phobias. They can also put you in touch with other people who've had similar experiences. Anxiety Alliance runs a helpline (0845 296 7877, that's open every day from 10am to 10pm). Calls are charged at the local rate. You can contact Anxiety Care UK by email \u2013 recoveryinfo@anxietycare.org.uk \u2013 for advice and support. Page last reviewed: 07\/06\/2016 Next review due: 07\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 174 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anxiety Counselling Panic disorder Phobias External links Anxiety Alliance Anxiety UK Triumph Over Phobia Anxiety Feeling anxious can be normal, but people with generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) find it hard to control their worries Cognitive behavioural therapy Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a type of problem-solving therapy \u2013 find out more here NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cleft lip and palate","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cleft-lip-and-palate","content":"Cleft lip and palate - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cleft lip and palate  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cleft lip and palate Cleft-lip-and-palate Treatment   A cleft is a gap or split in the upper lip and\/or roof of the mouth (palate). It is present from birth. The gap is there because parts of the baby's face didn't join together properly during development in the womb. A cleft lip and palate is the most common facial birth defect in the UK, affecting around one in every 700 babies. This page covers: What does it look like? Problems it can cause Causes Diagnosis Treatments Outlook Will it happen again? What does a cleft lip and palate look like? Babies can be born with a cleft lip, a cleft palate, or both. A cleft lip may just affect one side of the lip or there may be two clefts. It can range from a small notch to a wide gap that reaches the nose. A cleft palate may just be an opening at the back of the mouth, or it may be a split in the palate that runs all the way to the front of the mouth. Sometimes it can be hidden by the lining of the roof of the mouth. The Cleft Lip and Palate Association has a photo gallery with pictures of cleft lips and palates before and after surgery. Problems related to cleft lip and palate Cleft lips and cleft palates can sometimes cause a number of issues, particularly in the first few months, before surgery is carried out. Problems that can occur include: difficulty feeding \u2013 babies with a cleft palate may be unable to breastfeed or feed from a normal bottle because they can't form a good seal with their mouth hearing problems \u2013 some babies with a cleft lip are more vulnerable to ear infections and a build-up of fluid in their ears (glue ear), which may affect their hearing dental problems \u2013 a cleft lip and palate can mean a child's teeth don't develop correctly and they may be at a higher risk of tooth decay speech problems \u2013 if a cleft palate isn't repaired, it can lead to speech problems such as unclear or nasal-sounding speech when a child is older Most of these problems will improve after surgery and with treatments such as speech and language therapy (see Treatments below). Causes of cleft lip and palate A cleft lip or palate happens when the structures that form the upper lip or palate fail to join together when a baby is developing in the womb. The exact reason why this doesn't happen in some babies is often unclear. It's very unlikely to have been the result of anything you did or didn't do during pregnancy. In a few cases, cleft lip and palate is associated with: the genes a child inherits from their parents (although most cases are a one-off) smoking during pregnancy or drinking alcohol during pregnancy obesity during pregnancy a lack of folic acid during pregnancy taking certain medicines in early pregnancy, such as some anti-seizure medications and steroid tablets In some cases, a cleft lip or palate can occur as part of a condition that causes a wider range of birth defects, such as 22q11 deletion syndrome (sometimes known as DiGeorge or velocardiofacial syndrome) and Pierre Robin sequence. Diagnosing cleft lip and palate Cleft lips are usually picked up during the mid-pregnancy anomaly scan carried out when you're between 18 and 21 weeks pregnant. Not all cleft lips will be obvious on this scan and it's very difficult to detect a cleft palate on a routine ultrasound scan. If a cleft lip or palate doesn't show up on the scan, it's normally picked up immediately after birth or during the newborn physical examination done within 72 hours of giving birth. When a cleft lip or palate is diagnosed, you'll be referred to a specialist NHS cleft team who will explain your child's condition, discuss the treatments they may need and answer any questions you have. You may also find it useful to contact a support group, such as the Cleft Lip and Palate Association, who can offer advice and put you in touch with parents in a similar situation. Treatments for cleft lip and palate Cleft lips and cleft palates are treated at specialist NHS cleft centres. Your child will usually have a long-term care plan that outlines the treatments and assessments they're likely to need as they grow up. The main treatments are: surgery \u2013 surgery to correct a cleft lip is usually carried out at 3-6 months and an operation to repair a cleft palate is usually performed at 6-12 months feeding support \u2013 you may need advice about positioning your baby on your breast to help them feed, or you might need to feed them using a specially-designed bottle monitoring hearing \u2013 babies born with cleft palates have a higher chance of glue ear, which may affect hearing; close monitoring of their hearing is important and if glue ear affects their hearing significantly, a hearing aid may be fitted or small tubes called grommets may be placed in their ears to drain the fluid speech and language therapy \u2013 if your baby is born with a cleft affecting their palate (cleft palate or cleft lip and palate) a speech and language therapist will monitor your child's speech and language development throughout their childhood; they will help with any speech and language problems as necessary good dental hygiene and orthodontic treatment \u2013 you'll be given advice about looking after your child's teeth, and braces may be needed if their adult teeth don't come through properly Read more about how cleft lip and palate is treated. Outlook for cleft lip and palate The majority of children treated for cleft lip or palate grow up to have completely normal lives. Most affected children won't have any other serious medical problems and treatment can normally improve the appearance of the face and resolve issues such as feeding and speech problems. Surgery to repair the cleft may leave a small pink scar above the lips. This will fade over time and become less noticeable as your child gets older. Some adults who've had a cleft lip or palate repair may be self-conscious or unhappy about their appearance. Your GP may refer you back to an NHS cleft centre for further treatment and support if there are any ongoing issues. Will a cleft lip and palate happen again? Most cleft lips and palates are a one-off and it's unlikely you'll have another child with the condition. The risk of having a child with a cleft lip or palate is slightly increased if you've had a child with the condition before, but the chances of this happening are thought to be around 2-8%. If either you or your partner were born with a cleft, your chance of having a baby with a cleft is also around 2-8%. Most children of parents who had a cleft will not be born with a cleft. The chances of another child being born with a cleft or of a parent passing the condition to their child can be higher in cases related to genetic conditions. For example, a parent with 22q11 deletion syndrome (DiGeorge syndrome) has a 50% chance of passing the condition to their child. Information about your child If your child has a cleft lip or palate, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 29\/07\/2016 Next review due: 29\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 69 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Screening tests in pregnancy If antenatal screening tests find a possible problem Facial disfigurement External links BAPRAS: cleft lip and palate British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons (BAOMS) Changing Faces Cleft Lip and Palate Association (CLAPA) National Deaf Children's Society: cleft palate and deafness Information for parents on antenatal screening for cleft lip (PDF, 362kb) If antenatal screening finds a problem Next steps if screening tests show something might be wrong Breastfeeding help and support Find out about the breastfeeding help and support available, including midwives, helplines and websites NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Clinical trials and research","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Clinical-trials","content":"Clinical trials - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Clinical trials  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Clinical-trials Real stories Clinical-trials Search trials Clinical trials and medical research   A clinical trial compares the effects of one treatment with another. It may involve patients, healthy people, or both. How do I take part in a clinical trial? Why join a clinical trial? Will I get paid? What happens in a clinical trial? What should I know before I sign up? How are trials regulated and judged ethical? How are trial results used to improve treatment? Where can I find results from trials that are relevant to me?  How do I take part in a clinical trial? You can ask your doctor or a patient organisation if they know of any clinical trials that you may be eligible to join. You can also search for information on a number of websites and register your interest in taking part in research. The main ones are described below. UK Clinical Trials Gateway The UK Clinical Trials Gateway (UKCTG) website pulls through information about clinical trials and other research from several different UK registers. If you sign up to it, researchers can contact you about research that might be suitable for you.  You can also search the UKCTG site in various ways to find trials relevant to you, and you can contact researchers yourself. WHO International Clinical Trials The World Health Organization's Clinical Trials Search Portal provides access to clinical trials in countries all around the world. Charities For some conditions, you can find out about clinical trials from the websites of charities. Examples are: Arthritis Research UK: current clinical trials and studies Cancer Research UK: find a clinical trial   Multiple Sclerosis Society: MS clinical trials     Target Ovarian Cancer: clinical trials information centre Why join a clinical trial? Clinical trials help doctors understand how to treat a particular disease or condition. It may benefit you, or others like you, in the future. If you take part in a clinical trial, you may be one of the first people to benefit from a new treatment. However, there is also a chance that the new treatment turns out to be no better, or worse, than the standard treatment. To hear other people's experiences of taking part in a clinical trial, visit healthtalk.org: clinical trials. Will I get paid? Some clinical trials offer payment, which can vary from hundreds to thousands of pounds depending on what is involved and expected from you. Some trials don't offer payment and just cover your travel expenses. It's important to find out about the inconvenience and risks involved before you sign up, and to carefully weigh up whether it is worth it. Bear in mind: it can be time consuming \u2013 you may be expected to attend a number of screening and follow-up sessions, and some trials require you to stay overnight there may be restrictions on what you can and cannot do \u2013 for example, you may be asked to not eat or drink alcohol for a period of time you may experience unknown side effects from the treatment What happens in a clinical trial? Testing a new medicine All clinical trials of new medicines go through a series of phases to test whether they are safe and whether they work. The medicines will usually be tested against another treatment called a control. This will either be a dummy treatment (a placebo) or a standard treatment already in use. Learn more about the placebo effect. Phase one trials: A small number of people, who may be healthy volunteers, are given the medicine. The drug is being trialled in human volunteers for the first time. Researchers test for side effects and calculate what the right dose might be to use in treatment. Researchers start with small doses and only increase the dose if the volunteers don't experience any side effects, or if they only experience minor side effects. Phase two trials: The new medicine is tested on a larger group of people who are ill. This is to get a better idea of its effects in the short term. Phase three trials: Carried out on medicines that have passed phases one and two. The medicine is tested in larger groups of people who are ill, and compared against an existing treatment or a placebo to see if it's better in practice and if it has important side effects. Trials often last a year or more and involve several thousand patients. Phase four trials: The safety, side effects and effectiveness of the medicine continue to be studied while it is being used in practice. Not required for every medicine. Only carried out on medicines that have passed all the previous stages and have been given marketing licences \u2013 a licence means the medicine can be made available on prescription. Control groups, randomisation and blinding If you take part in a clinical trial, you will usually be randomly assigned to either the: treatment group \u2013 where you'll be given the treatment being assessed, or  control group \u2013 where you'll be given an existing standard treatment, or a placebo if no proven standard treatment exists While the treatments are different in the two groups, researchers try to keep as many of the other conditions the same as possible. For example, both groups should have people of a similar age, with a similar proportion of men and women, who are in similar overall health. In most trials, a computer will be used to randomly decide which group each patient will be allocated to. Many trials are set up so nobody knows who's been allocated to receive which treatment. This is known as blinding, and it helps reduce the effects of bias when comparing the outcomes of the treatments. What should I know before I sign up? When you express interest in a trial, a doctor or nurse is likely to tell you something about it in person. You'll also be given some printed information to take away. You may come back with some questions you feel haven't been answered. General questions What is the aim of the trial and how will it help people? Who is funding the trial? What treatment will I get if I do not take part in the trial? How long is the trial expected to last, and how long will I have to take part? How long will it be before the results of the trial are known? What will happen if I stop the trial treatment or leave the trial before it ends? What would happen if something went wrong? It's rare for patients to be harmed by trial treatments, but you may want to ask about compensation if this were to happen. Practical questions How much of my time will be needed? Will I need to take time off work? Will I be paid? Will the costs of my travel to take part in the trial be covered? If the trial is testing a new drug, will I have to collect it from the hospital, will it be sent to me by post, or will I get it through my doctor? Will I have to complete questionnaires or keep a diary? What are the possible side effects of my treatment? How could the treatments affect me physically and emotionally? Who can I contact if I have a problem? Will someone be available 24 hours a day? How do I find out the results of the trial? Things to weigh up As with any treatment, you can't be sure of the outcome. You may be given a new treatment that turns out not to be as effective as the standard treatment. Also, it's possible you'll experience unexpected side effects. And bear in mind that you may have to visit your place of treatment more often, or have more tests, treatments or monitoring, than you would if you were receiving the standard treatment in usual care. Leaving a trial You may decide to stop taking part in a trial if your condition is getting worse or if you feel the treatment isn't helping you. You can also choose to leave at any point without giving a reason and without it affecting the care you receive. Results At the end of the trial, the researchers should publish the results and make them available to anyone who took part and wanted to know the results. If the researchers don't offer you the results and you want to know, ask for them. Some research funders, such as the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), have websites where they publish the results of the research they have supported. How are trials regulated and judged ethical? Role of the MHRA Before a clinical trial of a new medicine can begin, a government agency called the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) needs to review and authorise it. The MHRA inspects sites where trials take place to make sure they're conducted in line with good clinical practice. Role of the HRA The Health Research Authority (HRA) works to protect and promote the interests of patients and the public in health research. It is responsible for research ethics committees up and down the country.  All medical research involving people in the UK, whether in the NHS or the private sector, first has to be approved by an independent research ethics committee. The committee protects the rights and interests of the people who will be in the trial. How are trial results used to improve treatment? Clinical trials can help: prevent illnesses by testing a vaccine detect or diagnose illnesses by testing a scan or blood test treat illnesses by testing new or existing medicines find out how best to provide psychological support  find out how people can control their symptoms or improve their quality of life \u2013 for example, by testing how a particular diet affects a condition Many clinical trials are designed to show whether new medicines work as expected. These results are sent to the MHRA, which decides whether to allow the company making the medicine to market it for a particular use. Licensing a treatment If research has identified a new medicine, the MHRA must license it before it can be marketed. Licensing shows a treatment has met certain standards of safety and effectiveness. Safety must be monitored carefully over the first few years of a newly licensed treatment. This is because rare side effects that weren't obvious in clinical trials may show up for the first time. In England and Wales, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) decides whether the NHS should provide treatments. Where can I find results from trials that are relevant to me? The results of clinical trials are usually published in specialist medical journals and online libraries of evidence. Some of the most well-known examples are: The Lancet medical journal British Medical Journal (BMJ) The New England Journal of Medicine Cochrane Library \u2013 a collection of high-quality evidence NHS Evidence database You can use a search engine such as Google to look for articles and read summaries (abstracts). But you can't usually see the full articles without a subscription to the journal. Also, research papers are not written in plain English and often use many medical, scientific and statistical terms. They can be very difficult to understand. Coverage in newspapers You'll often see stories about research findings in mainstream media. But while news stories are easier to read than original research papers, sometimes the findings are exaggerated or sensationalised. The NHS website aims to make this clearer for you. Behind the Headlines is an independent service that analyses health stories that make the news.  It aims to explain the facts behind the headlines and give a better understanding of the research that was carried out. How do clinical trials work? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, Dr Ben Goldacre explains why clinical trials are important, what they involve and who can take part in one. He also describes common concerns patients might have and gives tips on what questions to ask before taking part in any research. Media last reviewed: 20\/01\/2016 Next review due: 20\/01\/2018 Page last reviewed: 15\/06\/2016 Next review due: 15\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 305 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 177  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful UK Clinical Trials Gateway Search for clinical trials and find out how you can take part in health research    Useful links NHS Choices links Health regulators Medicines information Prostate cancer trials External links Association of British Healthcare Industries (ABHI) Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI) Association of Medical Research Charities (AMRC) Cancer Research UK: cancer trials Database of Uncertainties about the Effects of Treatments (DUETs) Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) Europe PubMed Central healthtalk.org: clinical trials Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) James Lind Alliance (JLA) Medical Research Council (MRC) Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) NHS Health Research Authority (HRA) National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Testing Treatments interactive (TTi) Understanding Animal Research UK Clinical Research Collaboration (UKCRC) Community content from HealthUnlocked About health records Find out about the different types of medical records in the NHS and what they're used for NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Search clinical trials","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Clinical-trials\/Pages\/clinical-trial.aspx","content":"Clinical Trials And Medical Research - Clinical trials - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Clinical trials  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Clinical-trials Real stories Clinical-trials Search trials Clinical-trials Clinical trials Search for clinical trials Enter conditions or interventions to search for relevant clinical trials Search tips: Terms that can be entered: Conditions: These could be a condition or number of conditions that the trial is aimed at testing e.g. diabetes, depression Interventions: These are treatments or actions being studied in the trial and usually refer to medicines, procedures or devices Enter a search term Search result filters Recruitment status All trials Only trials recruiting now Trials for children: All trials Only trials for children under 18 yrs Country of trial:To choose more than one country, hold the Ctrl key and click on another country. All countries Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bolivia (Plurinational States of) Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Bulgaria Burkina Faso Cambodia Cameroon Canada Central African Republic Chile China China (Province of Taiwan) China, Hong Kong SAR Colombia Congo Costa Rica Cote D'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic People's Republic of Korea Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guadeloupe Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Mali Malta Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Norway Oman Pakistan Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Republic of Korea Republic of Moldova Reunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Thailand The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United Republic of Tanzania United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Page last reviewed: Next review due: Share: Save: Print: Useful links NHS Choices links Health regulators Medicines information Prostate cancer trials External links Association of British Healthcare Industries (ABHI) Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI) Association of Medical Research Charities (AMRC) Cancer Research UK: cancer trials Database of Uncertainties about the Effects of Treatments (DUETs) Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) Europe PubMed Central healthtalk.org: clinical trials Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) James Lind Alliance (JLA) Medical Research Council (MRC) Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) NHS Health Research Authority (HRA) National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Testing Treatments interactive (TTi) Understanding Animal Research UK Clinical Research Collaboration (UKCRC) NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Clopidogrel","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/anti-platelets-clopidogrel","content":"Antiplatelets, clopidogrel - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Antiplatelets, clopidogrel  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anti-platelets-clopidogrel Community Antiplatelets, clopidogrel Anti-platelets-clopidogrel Special considerations Anti-platelets-clopidogrel Side effects Anti-platelets-clopidogrel Interactions - other medicines Introduction  Clopidogrel (brand name Plavix) is an antiplatelet medicine. This means it reduces the risk of blood clots forming. Normally, when there is a cut or break in a small blood vessel, a blood clot forms to plug the hole until the blood vessel heals. Small cells in the blood called platelets cause the blood to clot. When a platelet detects a damaged area of a blood vessel, it produces a chemical that attracts other platelets and makes them stick together to form a blood clot. Clopidogrel reduces the ability of the platelets to stick together and reduces the risk of clots forming. This protects you from having a stroke or heart attack. When is clopidogrel used? You may be given clopidogrel if you have had: a heart attack acute coronary syndrome (minor heart attack or unstable angina) a stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA) a coronary stent (a device to open up a blocked artery to the heart) an open heart operation peripheral arterial disease a vascular operation Clopidogrel and low-dose aspirin Sometimes, you may be given both low-dose aspirin and clopidogrel. Taken together, they are very effective, but there is a higher risk of bleeding, usually in the gut. This risk increases with age. The key question for your doctor is whether the benefits outweigh the extra risk. This combination treatment is prescribed for a limited period of time, usually up to a maximum of 12 months. After this period, your specialist will usually advise you to stop one of the two antiplatelet medications. Things to consider If you have certain health conditions such as a peptic ulcer or bleeding disorder you should not take clopidogrel, unless advised by a specialist. You should use clopidogrel with caution if you have liver or kidney problems. Clopidogrel must not be given to anyone under 16 years old, unless under specialist advice. It's also not recommended if you're pregnant or breastfeeding. Read more about things to consider before taking clopidogrel. Side effects Although serious reactions are rare, clopidogrel can cause side effects including indigestion and nausea. Read more about the side effects of clopidogrel. Clopidogrel can also interact with other medicines. Always read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine to check it is safe to take with clopidogrel. If you are unsure, ask your pharmacist or GP. Read more about how clopidogrel interacts with other medication. Missed or extra doses If you forget to take your dose of clopidogrel, take that dose as soon as you remember, then continue to take your course of clopidogrel as normal. However, if it's almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. If you have to take two doses closer together than normal, there is an increased risk of side effects. The patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine should also give you advice about what to do. If you accidentally take an extra dose or doses of clopidogrel, contact your GP or call NHS 111 for advice. Heart attack Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A consultant cardiologist explains what a heart attack is, the symptoms, surgical treatments and why it's important for coronary heart disease patients to reduce their risk factors. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Pharmacy and medicines Using your local pharmacy's services could save you an unnecessary trip to your GP Page last reviewed: 01\/08\/2014 Next review due: 01\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 431 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 120  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 107  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 136  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Aspirin Heart attack Stroke Healthy hearts Taking antiplatelets before major surgery External links The Stroke Association British Heart Foundation Yellow Card Scheme Community content from HealthUnlocked How your pharmacy can help Your local pharmacy is more than just a shop for medicines \u2013 it could save a trip to the GP NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Clostridium difficile","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Clostridium-difficile","content":"Clostridium difficile - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Clostridium difficile  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Clostridium-difficile Clinical trials Clostridium difficile Introduction  Clostridium difficile, also known as C. difficile or C. diff, is a bacterium that can infect the bowel and cause diarrhoea. The infection most commonly affects people who have recently been treated with antibiotics, but can spread easily to others. C. difficile infections are unpleasant and can sometimes cause serious bowel problems, but they can usually be treated with another course of antibiotics. This page covers: Symptoms of a C. difficile infection Who's most at risk of C. difficile? When to get medical advice Treatment for C. difficile Looking after yourself at home How you get C. difficile How to stop C. difficile spreading Symptoms of a C. difficile infection Symptoms of a C. difficile infection usually develop when you're taking antibiotics, or when you've finished taking them within the last few weeks. The most common symptoms are: watery diarrhoea, which can be bloody painful tummy cramps feeling sick signs of dehydration, such as a dry mouth, headaches and peeing less often than normal a high temperature (fever) of above 38C (100.4F) loss of appetite and weight loss In some cases, serious complications can develop, such as damage to the bowel or severe dehydration, which may cause drowsiness, confusion, a rapid heart rate and fainting. Who's most at risk of C. difficile? C. difficile mostly affects people who: have been treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics (antibiotics that work against several types of bacteria) or several different antibiotics at the same time, or those taking long-term antibiotics have had to stay in a healthcare setting, such as a hospital or care home, for a long time are over 65 years old have certain underlying conditions, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), cancer or kidney disease have a weakened immune system, which can be because of a condition such as diabetes or a side effect of a treatment such as chemotherapy or steroid medication are taking a medication called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) to reduce the amount of stomach acid they produce have had surgery on their digestive system Many C. difficile infections used to occur in places where many people take antibiotics and are in close contact with each other, such as hospitals and care homes. However, strict infection control measures have helped to reduce this risk, and an increasing number of C. difficile infections now occur outside these settings. When to get medical advice Visiting your GP surgery with a possible C. difficile infection can put others at risk, so it's best to call your GP or NHS 111 if you're concerned or feel you need advice. Get medical advice if: you have persistent diarrhoea after finishing a course of antibiotics you have bloody diarrhoea you have diarrhoea and experience severe tummy pain, a high fever, a rapid heart rate or fainting you have symptoms of severe dehydration, such as confusion, drowsiness, only passing small amounts of urine or no urine at all Diarrhoea can be caused by a number of conditions and is a common side effect of antibiotics, so having diarrhoea while taking antibiotics doesn't necessarily mean you have a C. difficile infection. Your GP may suggest sending off a sample of your poo to confirm whether you have C. difficile. A blood test may also be carried out to help determine how severe the infection is, and sometimes you may need tests or scans in hospital to check if your bowel is damaged. Treatment for C. difficile Your GP will decide whether you need hospital treatment (if you're not already in hospital). If the infection is relatively mild, you may be treated at home. If you're in hospital, you might be moved to a room of your own during treatment to reduce the risk of the infection spreading to others. Treatment for C. difficile can include: stopping the antibiotics thought to be causing the infection, if possible \u2013 in mild cases, this may be the only treatment that's needed taking a 10 to 14-day course of antibiotics that are known to kill C. difficile bacteria rarely, serious infections may require surgery to remove a damaged section of the bowel C. difficile infections usually respond well to treatment, with most people making a full recovery in a week or two. However, the symptoms come back in around 1 in 5 cases and treatment may need to be repeated. Looking after yourself at home If you're well enough to be treated at home, the following measures can help relieve your symptoms and prevent the infection spreading: make sure you finish the entire course of any antibiotics you're prescribed, even if you're feeling better drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration and eat plain foods such as soup, rice, pasta and bread if you feel hungry take paracetamol for tummy pain or a fever don't take anti-diarrhoeal medication, as this can stop the infection being cleared from your body regularly wash your hands and contaminated surfaces, objects or sheets (see How to stop C. difficile spreading) stay at home until at least 48 hours after your last episode of diarrhoea Your GP may contact you regularly to make sure you're getting better. Call them if your symptoms return after treatment finishes, as it may need to be repeated. How you get C. difficile C. difficile bacteria are found in the digestive system of about 1 in every 30 healthy adults. The bacteria often live harmlessly because the other bacteria normally found in the bowel keep it under control. However, some antibiotics can interfere with the balance of bacteria in the bowel, which can cause the C. difficile bacteria to multiply and produce toxins that make the person ill. When this happens, C. difficile can spread easily to other people because the bacteria are passed out of the body in the person's diarrhoea. Once out of the body, the bacteria turn into resistant cells called spores. These can survive for long periods on hands, surfaces (such as toilets), objects and clothing unless they're thoroughly cleaned, and can infect someone else if they get into their mouth. Someone with a C. difficile infection is generally considered to be infectious until at least 48 hours after their symptoms have cleared up. How to stop C. difficile spreading C. difficile infections can be passed on very easily. You can reduce your risk of picking it up or spreading it by practising good hygiene, both at home and in healthcare settings. The following measures can help: stay at home until at least 48 hours after your symptoms have cleared up wash your hands regularly with soap and water, particularly after going to the toilet and before eating \u2013 use liquid rather than bar soap and don't use flannels or nail brushes clean contaminated surfaces \u2013 such as the toilet, flush handle, light switches and door handles \u2013 with a bleach-based cleaner after each use don't share towels and flannels wash contaminated clothes and sheets separately from other washing at the highest possible temperature when visiting someone in hospital, observe any visiting guidelines, avoid taking any children under the age of 12, and wash your hands with liquid soap and water when entering and leaving ward areas \u2013 don't rely on alcohol hand gels, as they're not effective against C. difficile avoid visiting hospital if you're feeling unwell or have recently had diarrhoea Read more about preventing germs from spreading. Page last reviewed: 03\/02\/2016 Next review due: 03\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 781 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 465  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 163  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful C difficile Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. The symptoms of C difficile range from mild to very severe diarrhoea. Get expert advice on how to avoid it, how it spreads and treatments that can control the disease. Media last reviewed: 07\/05\/2015 Next review due: 07\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Diarrhoea Antibiotics C. difficile and pregnancy Staying in hospital Home hygiene External links Lab Tests Online UK: C. difficile test Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections How to prevent germs from spreading Cleaning and good hygiene tips to help reduce the number of germs in your home NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Club foot","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/talipes","content":"Club foot - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Club foot  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Talipes Clinical trials Club foot Talipes Treatment Introduction  Club foot is a deformity of the foot and ankle that babies can be born with. The position and function of the foot can be greatly improved, if treated early. The foot of a baby with club foot points down and inwards, with the soles of the feet facing backwards. Club foot isn\u2019t painful for babies, but it can become painful as they get older and cause difficulties walking if it isn\u2019t treated. Club foot is relatively common, affecting around one baby in every 1,000 born in the UK. Both feet are affected in around half of the children born with the condition. The medical name for club foot is congenital talipes equinovarus. What causes club foot? In most cases the cause of club foot is unknown, although there may be a genetic link because it can run in families. If you have one child with club foot, your risk of having a second child with the condition is around one in 35. If one parent had the condition as a baby, there is around a one in 30 chance of their children having the condition. If both parents previously had the condition, this increases to around a one in three chance. In a small number of cases, club foot occurs as part of a more serious underlying condition affecting the baby's development, such as spina bifida. Diagnosing club foot Club foot is usually diagnosed after a baby is born, although the problem may first be spotted during the routine ultrasound scan carried out between 18 and 21 weeks of pregnancy. It cannot be treated before birth, but picking up the problem during pregnancy means you can talk to doctors about the condition in detail and find out what to expect after your baby is born. Further tests may also be carried out while you're pregnant, to check for conditions such as spina bifida. How club foot is treated Treatment for club foot should ideally start within a week or two of the baby being born, but it can still be effective if started later in childhood. A technique known as the Ponseti method is the main treatment for club foot nowadays. This involves your baby's foot being gently manipulated into a better position and then being put in a cast. This is repeated weekly for around five to eight weeks. After this stage, it's likely that your baby will need a minor procedure (carried out using a local anaesthetic) to make a small cut in their Achilles tendon. This can help to release their foot into a more natural position. Your baby will need to wear special boots attached to each other with a bar, to prevent club foot returning. These are only worn full-time for the first three months, then overnight until your child is four or five years old. Read more about treating club foot. Outlook The vast majority of children treated with the Ponseti method will have pain-free, normal-looking feet that function well. Most children are able to learn to walk by the usual age and can participate in activities such as sports when they're older. Some children may be left with a slightly shorter leg and smaller foot on one side if only one of their feet was affected. This won't usually cause any significant problems, but it may mean that your child will be slightly less mobile and may get tired quicker than other children. Before the Ponseti method was widely adopted, club foot was often treated with surgery to alter the position of the foot. This wasn't always effective and lead to long-term pain and stiffness for some adults. Information about your child If your child has club foot, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 21\/01\/2015 Next review due: 21\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 85 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Club foot Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Vanessa and Jon's daughter was born with club feet. They describe coping with the diagnosis and choosing her treatment, and an expert compares physiotherapy with surgery. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Pregnancy and baby guide Children's feet video External links National Childbirth Trust Perinatal Institute STEPS Leg and foot problems in children Common problems affecting the legs and feet of children under five Screening in pregnancy Screening for abnormalities in pregnancy, including inherited disorders such as sickle cell Find and choose services for Club foot Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cluster headaches","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cluster-headaches","content":"Cluster headaches - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cluster headaches  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cluster-headaches Clinical trials cluster-headaches Community Cluster headaches Introduction  Cluster headaches are excruciating attacks of pain in one side of the head, often felt around the eye. They're estimated to affect around 1 in 500-1,000 people. Anyone of any age can be affected, but they're more common in men and tend to develop in people over the age of 20. It's not clear exactly what causes cluster headaches, but they've been linked to activity in part of the brain called the hypothalamus. People who smoke seem to be at a higher risk. Some cases also appear to run in families, which suggests there may be a genetic link. For most people, cluster headaches occur in recurrent \"bouts\" over several weeks (typically 4-12 weeks) followed by headache-free periods (remission) that often last for months, or sometimes years. Cluster headache bouts may occur every year over many years and may be lifelong. In general, they become less frequent over time. Treatment is available to control them. Symptoms of a cluster headache Cluster headaches begin suddenly and without warning. The pain is very severe and is often described as a sharp, burning or piercing sensation on one side of the head. The pain is typically felt around the eye, temple and sometimes face, and typically recurs on the same side for each attack. Often people feel restless and agitated during an attack because the pain is so intense, and may react by rocking, pacing or banging their head against the wall. They commonly also have at least one of the following associated symptoms: a red and watering eye  drooping and swelling of one eyelid a smaller pupil in one eye a sweaty face a blocked or runny nostril a red ear These attacks generally last between 15 minutes and three hours, and typically occur between one and eight times a day. Pattern of attacks Cluster headaches usually occur every day, in bouts lasting several weeks or months at a time, before they subside. Remission will often follow, which sometimes lasts months or years before the headaches start again. During a cluster headache bout, the headaches often occur at the same time each day. For example, people often wake up with a headache within a couple of hours of going to sleep. The attacks also seem to recur at similar times of the year, most often in spring and autumn. Some people notice certain triggers for their headaches during a period of attacks, such as: drinking alcohol warm temperatures exercise strong smells, such as perfume, paint or petrol Cluster headache bouts separated by a remission period of one month or more are known as episodic cluster headaches. Those separated by a remission period of less than one month, or present for at least 12 months without remission, are known as chronic cluster headaches. About 10-20% of cluster headache cases are chronic. Seeking medical advice You should see your GP as soon as possible the first time you experience what you think may be a cluster headache. They will ask you about your symptoms and may refer you for tests. In some people a brain scan is needed to exclude other conditions that can have similar symptoms to cluster headaches. Typically, in cluster headaches the brain scan is normal and the diagnosis is made on the basis of your symptoms without the need for tests. If you're diagnosed with cluster headaches, you will usually see a specialist such as a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves) to talk about your treatment options. Treating cluster headaches Cluster headaches aren't life threatening, but they can cause significant suffering and severely affect your quality of life, so it's important to see someone who is familiar with the known effective treatments for the condition. The headaches can't be treated with over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol, as these are too slow to take effect. You'll need to have one or more specialist treatments instead. Three main treatments are available to relieve pain when taken soon after a cluster headache starts. These are: sumatriptan injections, which you can give yourself up to twice a day sumatriptan or zolmitriptan nasal spray, which can be used if you would prefer not to have injections oxygen therapy, where you breathe pure oxygen through a mask \u2013 read more about home oxygen treatment These treatments usually relieve the pain of a cluster headache within 15-30 minutes. Preventing cluster headaches Your doctor may also prescribe medication to prevent cluster headaches during a headache bout. This involves starting treatment as soon as the headaches begin and continuing it until the bout is thought to have stopped. The main treatment recommended to prevent cluster headaches is a medication called verapamil, which is taken as a tablet several times a day. You'll need to be monitored by the doctor treating you with a test called an electrocardiogram (ECG) while taking this medication, as it can cause heart problems in some people. Alternative treatments may be considered if verapamil is not effective. These may include corticosteroids, lithium medication and occipital nerve blocks (injections of a local anaesthetic into the back of the head). There is now also a promising new treatment that uses a device to stimulate a nerve in the neck to prevent cluster headaches. This is known as external vagal nerve stimulation. Preventative treatments can vary in effectiveness from person to person. A few different treatments may need to be tried before your attacks are under control. Support groups Living with cluster headaches can be extremely difficult, so you may find it useful to seek further advice and support from organisations such as OUCH (UK). Page last reviewed: 10\/03\/2015 Next review due: 10\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 728 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 227  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 157  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 222  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Headaches Living with pain Find headache and migraine services External links National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): headaches OUCH (UK) Pain Concern Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CMV","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cytomegalovirus","content":"Cytomegalovirus (CMV) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cytomegalovirus (CMV)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cytomegalovirus Clinical trials Cytomegalovirus Cytomegalovirus Symptoms Cytomegalovirus Causes Cytomegalovirus Treatment Cytomegalovirus Prevention Introduction  Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a common virus that belongs to the herpes family of viruses.  It's spread through bodily fluids, such as saliva and urine, and can be passed on through close contact with young children, such as when changing nappies. CMV can also be passed on through kissing, having sex, or receiving an infected organ during an organ transplant. Read more about the causes of CMV infections. Most cases of CMV don't cause symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they're often similar to flu or glandular fever, and include a high temperature (fever), sore throat and swollen glands. Read more about the symptoms of CMV. Stages of infection You can get CMV at any age, but many people are first infected during childhood and are unaware they've been infected.  When you develop a CMV infection for the first time, it's known as primary CMV. It's thought that 50-80% of adults in the UK are infected with CMV. Once you've been infected, the CMV virus stays in your body for the rest of your life, but in most cases it remains inactive and doesn't cause further problems. However, CMV can sometimes be reactivated (recur). This usually only occurs in people who have a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, due to untreated HIV or taking immunosuppressant medication to prevent transplanted organs being rejected. It's also possible to become infected again with a different strain of the CMV virus. This is known as reinfection and usually causes similar symptoms to a primary infection. \u201CActive CMV\u201D is a term that describes someone who's infectious to another person and can be due to primary infection, reinfection or reactivation. Congenital CMV If a pregnant woman has an active CMV infection, the virus can be passed to her unborn baby. When it affects a baby in the womb, it's known as congenital CMV. In the UK, it's estimated that one to two babies in every 200 will be born with congenital CMV. Of these, about 13% will have problems at birth, such as hearing loss and learning difficulties, with a similar number developing problems later on. Treating a CMV infection CMV isn't usually diagnosed because it doesn't cause symptoms for most people. If you're at risk of developing complications, a blood test can help determine whether you've ever had CMV or if you've recently caught it for the first time. Urine and saliva swab tests can be used to find out whether a newborn baby has congenital CMV. Most CMV infections are mild, don't cause symptoms and don't need to be treated. If you do have symptoms, painkillers can be used to help reduce any pain or fever. Active CMV in someone with a weakened immune system is usually treated with antiviral medicines, which slow the spread of the virus. Some cases may need to be treated in hospital. Babies with congenital CMV may also need antiviral treatment. Read more about treating CMV. Preventing a CMV infection It's not always possible to prevent the spread of CMV, but you can reduce your risk by practising good hygiene, such as regularly washing your hands with soap and warm water. This is particularly important after changing nappies. You should also try to avoid coming into contact with the saliva of young children. Research is currently being carried out to find a possible vaccine for CMV. However, it's unlikely that a vaccine will be available for several years. Read more about preventing CMV. Cells infected with cytomegalovirus (CMV)  Page last reviewed: 17\/11\/2014 Next review due: 17\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 124 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Hearing impairment HIV and AIDS Infections during pregnancy Pregnancy and CMV External links AVERT: common HIV opportunistic infections BCM: about CMV CMV Action Pneumonia Pneumonia causes the tissue in one or both lungs to become inflamed. It's usually caused by an infection Find and choose services for Cytomegalovirus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coated or white tongue","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/coated-tongue","content":"Coated or white tongue - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coated or white tongue  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coated or white tongue Introduction  A coated or white tongue occurs when the surface is colonised by bacteria or fungi, and dead cells become trapped between the small nodules on the tongue. A coated tongue isn't a disease and isn't usually a sign of anything serious. It's usually only temporary. You can try gently brushing it with a tongue scraper and drinking plenty of water to help it improve. However, sometimes a coated tongue can indicate an infection or more serious condition. You should see your GP for advice if: you're concerned about changes to the appearance of your tongue your tongue hurts (read about the causes of tongue pain) your coated tongue persists for longer than two weeks You can read on to learn more about the possible causes of a coated tongue, but don't use this to diagnose yourself with a condition \u2013 always leave that to your GP. Note that in a minority of people, a coated tongue may never return to its normal colour or texture, even after treatment.  Common causes of white plaques on the tongue Leukoplakia Leukoplakia is a common condition that results in a white patch in the mouth, which sometimes appears on the tongue. The patch is usually painless but cannot be removed by brushing or scraping. This white patch seems to be the result of too many cells being produced from the lining of the mouth and a protein called keratin being deposited. Leukoplakia can develop when the tongue has been irritated, and is linked with drinking too much alcohol and also with smoking. Although not usually dangerous, in a few cases leukoplakia turns cancerous, often many years or even decades after it first appears.  It's important that your mouth is regularly examined by a dentist or doctor to ensure any leukoplakia isn't increasing in size or changing, or that new areas of leukoplakia are not developing.  Read more information about leukoplakia. Your dentist or specialist will usually be able to tell the difference between a white tongue caused by leukoplakia and a coated tongue. Oral lichen planus Oral lichen planus (lichen planus of the mouth) is a long-term disorder of the immune system that causes white lacy streaks and white patches in the mouth, including on the tongue.  Mild cases do not usually cause any pain or discomfort, although it can cause burning sensations and discomfort in the mouth, painful red gums and sore patches in the lining of the mouth. The exact cause of oral lichen planus is unknown. It doesn't run in families and can't be passed on to other people.  Mild cases will not need any treatment. More severe cases can be managed with an antiseptic mouthwash plus steroid sprays or steroid tablets dissolved in water to make a mouth rinse. Read more information about lichen planus. Oral thrush Oral thrush is a yeast infection in the mouth caused by a fungus. It can cause a burning sensation on the tongue as well as sore white plaques that can be scraped off (although it may sometimes appear as a red patch). You are more likely to develop oral thrush if you: have diabetes are a certain age (oral thrush is more common in infants and elderly people) often take antibiotics have an iron deficiency or B-vitamin deficiency  have a weakened immune system wear dentures  You should see your GP if you think you have oral thrush. If it's left untreated, the symptoms will persist and your mouth will continue to be uncomfortable. Treatment is with antifungal medicines. Read more information about oral thrush. Syphilis Syphilis is a bacterial infection usually caught by having sex with someone who is infected. Syphilis can cause a small painless sore or ulcer on the tongue if caught from having oral sex. This appears from 10 days to three months after exposure to the infection. Treatment is with a single dose of penicillin. If left untreated, syphilis may lead to white plaques on the tongue called syphilitic leukoplakia. Read more information about syphilis. Oral thrush affecting the tongue  Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening Page last reviewed: 05\/11\/2014 Next review due: 05\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 454 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 199  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Tongue pain Oral thrush Leukoplakia External links British Dental Health Foundation: approved products Dental check-ups How often you need a dental check-up, and what to expect when you visit your dentist NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coccydynia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Coccydinia","content":"Coccydynia (tailbone pain) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coccydynia (tailbone pain)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coccydynia coccydinia Causes coccydinia Treatment   Coccydynia is a pain felt in your coccyx. This is the last bone at the bottom of the spine (tailbone). You can get it if you injure or strain your coccyx or the surrounding muscles and ligaments. In most cases, the pain will improve over a few weeks or months, but occasionally it can last much longer and severely affect your ability to carry out every day activities. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Causes Treatments Symptoms of coccydynia The main symptom is pain and tenderness in the area just above the buttocks. The pain may: be dull and achy most of the time, with occasional sharp pains be worse when sitting down, moving from sitting to standing, standing for long periods, having sex and going for a poo make it very difficult to sleep and carry out everyday activities, such as driving or bending over Some people also have back pain, shooting leg pains (sciatica) and painful buttocks and hips. When to get medical advice Coccydynia will often improve on its own after a few weeks and there are some simple treatments you can try at home (see below). See your GP if: the pain doesn't start to improve within a few weeks simple home treatments don't relieve the pain your pain is very severe you also have bleeding, a high temperature (fever) or pain away from your coccyx Your GP will carry out an examination to check for more serious causes of your pain, such as infection or a fracture. In some cases, they may also refer you for tests such as X-rays or an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan. Causes of coccydynia Common causes of coccydynia include: childbirth an injury or accident, such as a fall repeated or prolonged strain on the coccyx poor posture being overweight or underweight Less common causes can include a bony growth on the coccyx, the coccyx being too flexible or too rigid, and arthritis. Rare but serious causes include infection and cancer. In many cases, no obvious cause can be found. Age-related \"wear and tear\" may play a part. Read more about the causes of coccydynia. Treatments for coccydynia There are a number of treatments for coccydynia. Simple measures you can try at home are usually recommended first and other treatments may be used if these don't help. The main treatments are: self-care measures, such as avoiding prolonged sitting, using a specially-designed coccyx cushion (doughnut cushions), applying hot or cold packs to your lower back and wearing loose clothing  non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) painkillers that you can buy from shops and pharmacies, such as ibuprofen Persistent symptoms lasting longer than eight weeks may benefit from: physiotherapy exercises, massage and stretching injections of anti-inflammatories (corticosteroids) and painkillers into the coccyx or surrounding area In a small number of cases where other treatments haven't helped, surgery may be needed to manipulate the coccyx. Very rarely the coccyx may need to be removed (coccygectomy). Read more about the how coccydynia is treated. Page last reviewed: 10\/07\/2016 Next review due: 10\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 137 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 68  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back health NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) Corticosteroids Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coeliac disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Coeliac-disease","content":"Coeliac disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coeliac disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coeliac-disease Real stories Coeliac-disease Clinical trials Coeliac-disease Community Coeliac disease Coeliac-disease Symptoms Coeliac-disease Causes Coeliac-disease Diagnosis Coeliac-disease Treatment Coeliac-disease Complications Introduction  Coeliac disease is a common digestive condition where a person has an adverse reaction to gluten. Eating foods containing gluten can trigger a range of symptoms, such as: diarrhoea, which may smell particularly unpleasant bloating and flatulence (passing wind) abdominal pain weight loss feeling tired all the time as a result of  malnutrition (not getting enough nutrients from food) children not growing at the expected rate Symptoms can range from mild to severe. Read more about the symptoms of coeliac disease. What causes coeliac disease? Coeliac disease is an autoimmune condition. This is where the immune system \u2013 the body's defence against infection \u2013 mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. Coeliac disease isn't an allergy or an intolerance to gluten. In cases of coeliac disease, the immune system mistakes substances found inside gluten as a threat to the body and attacks them. This damages the surface of the small bowel (intestines), disrupting the body's ability to absorb nutrients from food. Exactly what causes the immune system to act in this way is still not entirely clear, although a combination of a person's genetic make-up and the environment appear to play a part. Read more about the causes of coeliac disease. Gluten Gluten is a protein found in three types of cereal: wheat barley rye Gluten is found in any food that contains the above cereals, including: pasta cakes breakfast cereals most types of bread certain types of sauces some types of ready meals In addition, most beers are made from barley. Treating coeliac disease There is no cure for coeliac disease, but switching to a gluten-free diet should help control symptoms and prevent the long-term consequences of the disease. Even if symptoms are mild or non-existent, it is still recommended to change your diet, as continuing to eat gluten can lead to serious complications. It is important to make sure your gluten-free diet is healthy and balanced. An increase in the range of available gluten-free foods in recent years has made it possible to eat both a healthy and varied gluten-free diet. Read more about the treatment of coeliac disease. Screening Currently, screening for coeliac disease is not routinely carried out in England. It is usually only recommended for people at an increased risk of developing the condition, such as those with a family history of the disease.  It is recommended that first-degree relatives (parents, brothers, sisters and children) of people with coeliac disease are screened. See diagnosing coeliac disease for more information about who should be screened for coeliac disease. Complications Complications of coeliac disease only tend to affect people who continue to eat gluten or who have yet to be diagnosed with the condition, which can be a common problem in milder cases. Potential long-term complications include: osteoporosis (weakening of the bones) iron deficiency anaemia vitamin B12 and folate deficiency anaemia  Less common and more serious complications include those affecting pregnancy, such as having a low-birth weight baby, and some types of cancers, such as bowel cancer. Read more about the complications of coeliac disease. Who is affected? Coeliac disease is a common condition that affects approximately 1 in every 100 people in the UK. However, some experts think this may be an underestimate because milder cases may go undiagnosed or be misdiagnosed as other digestive conditions, such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Reported cases of coeliac disease are two to three times higher in women than men and can develop at any age, although symptoms are most likely to develop: during early childhood \u2013 at between 8 and 12 months old (though it may take several years before a correct diagnosis is made)  in later adulthood \u2013 between the ages of 40 and 60 years Information about you If you have coeliac disease, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Gluten is a protein found in wheat, barley and rye  Coeliac UK The UK's leading charity for people affected by coeliac disease is Coeliac UK. Their website contains a range of useful resources, including information on gluten-free diets and specific products, as well as the details of local groups, volunteering and ongoing campaigns. The charity also has a telephone helpline on 0845 305 2060, open Monday to Friday from 9am to 5pm. Page last reviewed: 31\/07\/2014 Next review due: 30\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 877 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 458  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 221  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Diarrhoea Digestive health Living with a long-term condition Malnutrition Osteoporosis External links British Nutrition Foundation Coeliac UK Beat the bloat Tips for getting rid of bloating, including cutting out 'windy' foods and fizzy drinks, plus regular exercise Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Coeliac disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cognitive behavioural therapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cognitive-behavioural-therapy","content":"Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cognitive-behavioural-therapy Real stories Cognitive-behavioural-therapy Clinical trials Cognitive behavioural therapy Cognitive-behavioural-therapy How it works   Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a talking therapy that can help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and behave. It's most commonly used to treat anxiety and depression, but can be useful for other mental and physical health problems. This topic covers: How it works Uses What happens during a session Pros and cons Finding a therapist How CBT works CBT is based on the concept that your thoughts, feelings, physical sensations and actions are interconnected, and that negative thoughts and feelings can trap you in a vicious cycle. CBT aims to help you deal with overwhelming problems in a more positive way by breaking them down into smaller parts. You're shown how to change these negative patterns to improve the way you feel. Unlike some other talking treatments, CBT deals with your current problems, rather than focusing on issues from your past. It looks for practical ways to improve your state of mind on a daily basis. Read more about how CBT works. Uses for CBT CBT has been shown to be an effective way of treating a number of different mental health conditions. In addition to depression or anxiety disorders, CBT can also help people with: obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)  panic disorder post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) phobias eating disorders \u2013 such as anorexia and bulimia sleep problems \u2013 such as insomnia problems related to alcohol misuse CBT is also sometimes used to treat people with long-term health conditions, such as: irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) Although CBT can't cure the physical symptoms of these conditions, it can help people cope better with their symptoms. What happens during CBT sessions If CBT is recommended, you'll usually have a session with a therapist once a week or once every two weeks. The course of treatment usually lasts for between five and 20 sessions, with each session lasting 30-60 minutes. During the sessions, you'll work with your therapist to break down your problems into their separate parts \u2013 such as your thoughts, physical feelings and actions. You and your therapist will analyse these areas to work out if they're unrealistic or unhelpful and to determine the effect they have on each other and on you. Your therapist will then be able to help you work out how to change unhelpful thoughts and behaviours. After working out what you can change, your therapist will ask you to practise these changes in your daily life and you'll discuss how you got on during the next session. The eventual aim of therapy is to teach you to apply the skills you've learnt during treatment to your daily life. This should help you manage your problems and stop them having a negative impact on your life \u2013 even after your course of treatment finishes. Pros and cons of CBT Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) can be as effective as medication in treating some mental health problems, but it may not be successful or suitable for everyone. Some of the advantages of CBT include: it may be helpful in cases where medication alone hasn't worked it can be completed in a relatively short period of time compared to other talking therapies the highly structured nature of CBT means it can be provided in different formats, including in groups, self-help books and computer programs it teaches you useful and practical strategies that can be used in everyday life \u2013 even after the treatment has finished Some of the disadvantages of CBT to consider include: you need to commit yourself to the process to get the most from it \u2013 a therapist can help and advise you, but they need your co-operation attending regular CBT sessions and carrying out any extra work between sessions can take up a lot of your time it may not be suitable for people with more complex mental health needs or learning difficulties \u2013 as it requires structured sessions it involves confronting your emotions and anxieties \u2013 you may experience initial periods where you're anxious or emotionally uncomfortable it focuses on the individual\u2019s capacity to change themselves (their thoughts, feelings and behaviours) \u2013 which doesn't address any wider problems in systems or families that often have a significant impact on an individual\u2019s health and wellbeing Some critics also argue that because CBT only addresses current problems and focuses on specific issues, it doesn't address the possible underlying causes of mental health conditions, such as an unhappy childhood. Finding a CBT therapist If you think you have a problem that may benefit from treatment with CBT, the first step is usually to speak to your GP.  Your GP may be able to refer you for CBT that's free on the NHS, although you may have to wait.  Find psychological therapy services. If you can afford it, you can choose to pay for your therapy privately. The cost of private therapy sessions varies, but it's usually £40-100 per session. If you're considering having CBT privately, ask your GP if they can suggest a local therapist. The British Association for Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies (BABCP) keeps a register of all accredited therapists in the UK and The British Psychological Society (BPS) has a directory of chartered psychologists, some of whom specialise in CBT. Page last reviewed: 15\/07\/2016 Next review due: 15\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1199 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 461  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 328  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 250  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Stress, anxiety and depression Generalised anxiety disorder Clinical depression OCD Panic disorder Phobias Counselling Psychotherapy External links Mental Health Foundation: talking therapies Rethink Mental Illness Mind BABCP: CBT Royal College of Psychiatrists: CBT British Psychological Society Mental health services Find out what mental health services exist and how to access them Benefits of talking therapy Find out about counselling and talking therapies, and how they can help Can I get free therapy or counselling? Find out whether you can get counselling free on the NHS, and how to access it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coil","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/iud-coil.aspx","content":"IUD coil - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: IUD (intrauterine device) A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping eggs being produced. One method of contraception is the intrauterine device, or IUD (sometimes called a coil). At a glance: facts about the IUD   How the IUD works   Who can use the IUD   Advantages and disadvantages of the IUD   Risks of the IUD   Where you can get an IUD An IUD is a small T-shaped plastic and copper device that\u2019s inserted into your womb (uterus) by a specially trained doctor or nurse.  The IUD works by stopping the sperm and egg from surviving in the womb or fallopian tubes. It may also prevent a fertilised egg from implanting in the womb. The IUD is a long-acting reversible contraceptive (LARC) method. This means that once it's in place, you don't have to think about it each day or each time you have sex. There are several types and sizes of IUD. You can use an IUD whether or not you've had children.   At a glance: facts about the IUD There are different types of IUD, some with more copper than others. IUDs with more copper are more than 99% effective. This means that fewer than one in 100 women who use an IUD will get pregnant in one year. IUDs with less copper will be less effective.  An IUD works as soon as it's put in, and lasts for five to 10 years, depending on the type. It can be put in at any time during your menstrual cycle, as long as you're not pregnant. It can be removed at any time by a specially trained doctor or nurse and you'll quickly return to normal levels of fertility. Changes to your periods (for example, being heavier, longer or more painful) are common in the first three to six months after an IUD is put in, but they're likely to settle down after this. You might get spotting or bleeding between periods.  There's a very small chance of infection within 20 days of the IUD being fitted.  There's a risk that your body may expel the IUD. If you get pregnant, there's an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy (when the egg implants outside the womb). But because you're unlikely to get pregnant, the overall risk of ectopic pregnancy is lower than in women who don't use contraception.  Having the IUD put in can be uncomfortable. Ask the doctor or nurse about pain relief. An IUD may not be suitable for you if you've had previous pelvic infections. The IUD does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using condoms as well as the IUD, you'll help to protect yourself against STIs. How the IUD works How it prevents pregnancy Having an IUD fitted How to tell whether an IUD is still in place Removing an IUD How it prevents pregnancy The IUD is similar to the IUS (intrauterine system) but works in a different way. Instead of releasing the hormone progestogen like the IUS, the IUD releases copper. Copper changes the make-up of the fluids in the womb and fallopian tubes, stopping sperm surviving there. IUDs may also stop fertilised eggs from implanting in the womb. There are types and sizes of IUD to suit different women. IUDs need to be fitted by a trained doctor or nurse at your GP surgery, local contraception clinic or sexual health clinic. An IUD can stay in the womb for five to 10 years, depending on the type. If you're 40 or over when you have an IUD fitted, it can be left in until you reach the menopause or until you no longer need contraception. Having an IUD fitted An IUD can be fitted at any time during your menstrual cycle, as long as you are not pregnant. You'll be protected against pregnancy straight away. Before you have an IUD fitted, you will have an internal examination to find out the size and position of your womb. This is to make sure that the IUD can be put in the correct place. You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you You may also be tested for infections, such as STIs. It's best to do this before an IUD is fitted so that you can have treatment (if you need it) before the IUD is put in. Sometimes, you may be given antibiotics at the same time as the IUD is fitted. It takes about 15 to 20 minutes to insert an IUD. The vagina is held open, like it is during a cervical screening (smear) test, and the IUD is inserted through the cervix and into the womb. The fitting process can be uncomfortable and sometimes painful. You may get cramps afterwards. You can ask for a local anaesthetic or painkillers before having the IUD fitted. An anaesthetic injection itself can be painful, so many women have the procedure without. You may get pain and bleeding for a few days after having an IUD fitted. Discuss this with your GP or nurse beforehand.   The IUD needs to be checked by a doctor after three to six weeks. Speak to your doctor or nurse if you have any problems before or after this first check or if you want the IUD removed. Speak to your doctor or nurse if you or your partner are at risk of getting an STI. This is because STIs can lead to an infection in the pelvis. See your GP or go back to the clinic where your IUD was fitted as soon as you can if you: have pain in your lower abdomen have a high temperature have a smelly discharge These may mean you have an infection. How to tell whether an IUD is still in place An IUD has two thin threads that hang down a little way from your womb into the top of your vagina. The doctor or nurse who fits your IUD will teach you how to feel for these threads and check that it is still in place. Check your IUD is in place a few times in the first month, and then after each period or at regular intervals.  It's very unlikely that your IUD will come out, but if you can't feel the threads, or if you think the IUD has moved, you may not be fully protected against getting pregnant. See your doctor or nurse straight away and use an extra method of contraception, such as condoms, until your IUD has been checked. If you've had sex recently, you may need to use emergency contraception. Your partner shouldn't be able to feel your IUD during sex. If he can feel the threads, get your doctor or nurse to check that your IUD is in place. They may be able to cut the threads to a shorter length. If you feel any pain during sex, go for a check-up. Removing an IUD An IUD can be removed at any time by a trained doctor or nurse. If you're not going to have another IUD put in and you don't want to get pregnant, use another method (such as condoms) for seven days before you have the IUD removed. This is to stop sperm getting into your body. Sperm can live for up to seven days in the body and could make you pregnant once the IUD is removed. As soon as an IUD is taken out, your normal fertility should return.  Who can use an IUD Most women can use an IUD. This includes women who have never been pregnant and those who are HIV positive. Your doctor or nurse will ask about your medical history to check if an IUD is the most suitable form of contraception for you. You should not use an IUD if you have: an untreated STI or a pelvic infection  problems with your womb or cervix  any unexplained bleeding from your vagina \u2013 for example, between periods or after sex Women who have had an ectopic pregnancy or recent abortion, or who have an artificial heart valve, must consult their GP or clinician before having an IUD fitted. You should not be fitted with an IUD if there's a chance that you are already pregnant or if you or your partner are at risk of catching STIs. If you or your partner are unsure, go to your GP or a sexual health clinic to be tested. Using an IUD after giving birth An IUD can usually be fitted four to six weeks after giving birth (vaginal or caesarean). You'll need to use alternative contraception from three weeks (21 days) after the birth until the IUD is fitted. In some cases, an IUD can be fitted within 48 hours of giving birth. An IUD is safe to use when you're breastfeeding and it won't affect your milk supply. Using an IUD after a miscarriage or abortion An IUD can be fitted straight away or within 48 hours after an abortion or miscarriage by an experienced doctor or nurse, as long as you were pregnant for less than 24 weeks. If you were pregnant for more than 24 weeks, you may have to wait a few weeks before having an IUD fitted.  Advantages and disadvantages of the IUD Although an IUD is an effective method of contraception, there are some things to consider before having one fitted. Advantages of the IUD Most women can use an IUD, including women who have never been pregnant. Once an IUD is fitted, it works straight away and lasts for up to 10 years or until it's removed. It doesn't interrupt sex. It can be used if you're breastfeeding. Your normal fertility returns as soon as the IUD is taken out It's not affected by other medicines. There's no evidence that having an IUD fitted will increase the risk of cancer of the cervix, endometrial cancer (cancer of the lining of the womb) or ovarian cancer. Some women experience changes in mood and libido, but these changes are very small. There is no evidence that the IUD affects weight. Disadvantages of the IUD Your periods may become heavier, longer or more painful, though this may improve after a few months.  An IUD doesn't protect against STIs, so you may have to use condoms as well. If you get an STI while you have an IUD, it could lead to a pelvic infection if not treated. The most common reasons that women stop using an IUD are vaginal bleeding and pain. Risks of the IUD Complications after having an IUD fitted are rare. Most will appear within the first year after fitting. Damage to the womb In fewer than one in 1,000 cases, an IUD can perforate (make a hole in) the womb or neck of the womb (cervix) when it's put in. This can cause pain in the lower abdomen, but doesn't usually cause any other symptoms. If the doctor or nurse fitting your IUD is experienced, the risk of this is very low. If perforation occurs, you may need surgery to remove the IUD. Contact your GP straight away if you feel a lot of pain after having an IUD fitted as perforations should be treated immediately. Pelvic infections Pelvic infections can occur in the first 20 days after the IUD is fitted. The risk of infection is very small. Fewer than one in 100 women who are at low risk of STIs will get a pelvic infection. Rejection Occasionally, the IUD is rejected (expelled) by the womb or can move (this is called displacement). This is more likely to happen soon after it has been fitted, although this is uncommon. Your doctor or nurse will teach you how to check that your IUD is in place. Ectopic pregnancy If the IUD fails and you become pregnant, your IUD should be removed as soon as possible if you're going to continue with the pregnancy. There's a small increased risk of ectopic pregnancy if a woman becomes pregnant while using an IUD. Where to get an IUD Most types of contraception are available free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics sexual health clinics \u2013 these offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people\u2019s services (call the sexual health line on 0300 123 7123 for details) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching your postcode or town. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacists won't tell your parents or carer, as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.   Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/01\/2015 Next review due: 12\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 663 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 378  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 131  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles What services do contraception clinics offer? Talking to your partner about sex   External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Hospital Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose IUS The IUS is a hormonal contraceptive inserted into the uterus to prevent pregnancy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cold","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cold-common","content":"Common cold - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Common cold  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cold-common Clinical trials Common cold Cold-common Symptoms Cold-common Treatment Cold-common Complications Cold-common Children Introduction  A cold is a mild viral infection of the nose, throat, sinuses and upper airways. It's very common and usually clears up on its own within a week or two. The main symptoms of a cold include: a sore throat a blocked or runny nose sneezing a cough More severe symptoms, including a high temperature (fever), headache and aching muscles can also occur, although these tend to be associated more with flu. Read more about the symptoms of a cold. What to do There's no cure for a cold, but you can look after yourself at home by: resting, drinking plenty of fluids and eating healthily taking over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, to reduce any fever or discomfort using decongestant sprays or tablets to relieve a blocked nose trying remedies such as gargling salt water and sucking on menthol sweets Many painkillers and decongestants are available from pharmacies without a prescription. They're generally safe for older children and adults to take, but might not be suitable for babies, young children, pregnant women, people with certain underlying health conditions, and those taking certain other medications. Speak to a pharmacist if you're unsure. Read more about treating colds and colds in younger children. When to see your GP If you or your child has a cold, there's usually no need to see your GP as it should clear within a week or two. You only really need to contact your GP if: your symptoms persist for more than three weeks your symptoms get suddenly worse you have breathing difficulties you develop complications of a cold, such as chest pain or coughing up bloodstained mucus It might also be a good idea to see your GP if you're concerned about your baby or an elderly person, or if you have a long-term illness such as a lung condition. You can also phone NHS 111 for advice. How do colds spread?  In general, a person becomes contagious from a few days before their symptoms begin until all of their symptoms have gone. This means most people will be infectious for around two weeks. You can catch the virus from an infectious person by: touching an object or surface contaminated by infected droplets and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes touching the skin of someone who has the infected droplets on their skin and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes inhaling tiny droplets of fluid that contain the cold virus \u2013 these are launched into the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes Colds spread most easily among groups of people in constant close contact, such as families and children in school or day care facilities. They're also more frequent during the winter, although it's not clear exactly why. A number of different viruses can cause a cold, so it's possible to have several colds one after the other, as each one may be caused by a different virus. How can I stop a cold spreading? You can take some simple steps to help prevent the spread of a cold. For example: wash your hands regularly, particularly before touching your nose or mouth and before handling food always sneeze and cough into tissues \u2013 this will help prevent the virus-containing droplets from your nose and mouth entering the air, where they can infect others; you should throw away used tissues immediately and wash your hands  clean surfaces regularly to keep them free of germs  use your own cup, plates, cutlery and kitchen utensils don't share towels or toys with someone who has a cold It's been suggested that vitamin C, zinc  and garlic supplements may help reduce your risk of getting a cold, but there's currently not enough strong evidence to support this. Read more about preventing colds and flu. Page last reviewed: 30\/04\/2015 Next review due: 30\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1161 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 594  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 237  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 194  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Colds and flu Spotting signs of serious illness in your child Winter health External links Treat Yourself Better Five ways to stay healthy this winter It may be cold outside, but winter needn't be the unhealthiest time of year for you and your family Cough Find out about the main causes of a cough, when to seek medical advice, and what treatments are available Colds and flu The difference between a cold and flu, remedies and who needs to have the flu jab NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cold panniculitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/panniculitis","content":"Panniculitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Panniculitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Panniculitis Introduction  Panniculitis is a broad term refering to inflammation of the fatty layer underneath the skin. It's usually seen in women, on the thighs and lower legs. There are many types of panniculitis \u2013 with different causes \u2013 but the condition generally causes the skin to feel hard and to develop painful red lumps (nodules) or patches (plaques), making it look darker in places. Panniculitis usually affects the shins and calves, but may spread to the thighs, forearms and chest. It tends to clear up within six weeks, fading like a bruise, usually without scarring. When the inflammation has settled, a depression in the skin may be left, which can be temporary or permanent. Many people get recurring bouts of panniculitis. Other symptoms As well as skin symptoms, panniculitis may also be associated with: fever fatigue weight loss nausea and vomiting joint pain What are the causes? There are a wide range of possible causes of panniculitis, although often the cause is not known. Common causes include: an infection \u2013 usually a viral or bacterial infection, but sometimes tuberculosis an inflammatory disease such as Crohn\u2019s disease or ulcerative colitis some medicines, including the oral contraceptive pill or sulphonamides (a group of antibiotics) sarcoidosis \u2013 a rare disease that causes body cells to form into clumps, called granulomas, in the lungs and skin leukaemia (cancer of the white blood cells) or lymphoma (cancer of the lymphatic system, part of your immune system) Some cases of panniculitis may be caused by the body's immune system mistakenly attacking the fat cells. Types of panniculitis The layer of fat underneath the skin is made of lobules (groups of fat cells) held together by connective tissue. Doctors sometimes classify the disease as either: \u2018mostly septal\u2019 \u2013 the inflammation mostly affects the connective tissue \u2018mostly lobular\u2019 \u2013 it mostly affects the fat lobules Some people will also have vasculitis, where the immune system attacks the body's blood vessels. If a blood vessel is inflamed, it can narrow or close off, this can limit, or even prevent, blood flow through the vessel and potentially damage organs. The most common type of panniculitis is erythema nodosum, which affects the shins. In about half of all cases of erythema nodosum, the cause is unknown. A similar form of the disease is Weber-Christian disease, also known as idiopathic lobular panniculitis (idiopathic means \u2018unknown cause\u2019). This most commonly affects the thighs and lower legs of women aged 30-60, and can also cause the non-skin symptoms mentioned above, such as fever and fatigue. Other types include: erythema induratum (nodular vasculitis), which usually affects the calves of young women and is often caused by tuberculosis cold panniculitis, which affects areas of skin exposed to the cold \u2013 for example, it can affect the cheeks and forehead of infants and children subcutaneous sarcoidosis, when the cause is the rare disease sarcoidosis A full list of all the different types of panniculitis can be found on DermNet NZ, which provides pictures and detailed information on the specific types. How is panniculitis treated? Doctors will aim to treat the underlying cause of the panniculitis, if known, and relieve some of the symptoms. While treatment is underway, you will be asked to ensure you get enough rest and to elevate the affected area when possible. Treatments will vary; for example, if panniculitis is triggered by medication, this medicine should be stopped \u2013 but don't stop taking any medication without first speaking to your GP. If the cause is a bacterial infection, you will be prescribed anti-inflammatory antibiotics, such as tetracycline, to clear the infection. If the cause is sarcoidosis, you may not need any medical treatment as the disease often goes away on its own with time (usually a couple of years). Often, simple lifestyle changes, over the counter painkillers, and support bandages are all that is needed to control any flare ups. Read more about managing sarcoidosis.  The following treatments may help to relieve symptoms: Joint pain and painful skin nodules can be relieved with anti-inflammatory painkillers (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen. A solution of potassium iodide may help to relieve symptoms \u2013 this is thought to have an effect on white blood cells (read more about potassium iodide treatment for skin conditions). The inflammation may occasionally be treated with steroid cream, steroid tablets or injections, or immunosuppressants (drugs to weaken the immune system), if the immune system is responsible. If the condition is severe and the above treatments don't help, you may wish to consider surgical removal of particularly bad patches of skin. Your GP will refer you to a dermatologist (skin specialist) to discuss the pros and cons of surgery. Community content from HealthUnlocked Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Page last reviewed: 26\/08\/2014 Next review due: 26\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 74 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links NSAID painkillers External links British Association of Dermatologists Sarcoidosis Everything you need to know about this rare condition, including advice on living with sarcoidosis NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cold sore","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cold-sore","content":"Cold sore (herpes simplex virus) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cold sore (herpes simplex virus)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cold-sore Clinical trials Cold sore Cold-sore Symptoms Cold-sore Causes Cold-sore Treatment Introduction  Cold sores are small blisters that develop on the lips or around the mouth. They're caused by the herpes simplex virus and usually clear up without treatment within 7 to 10 days. You may not have any symptoms when you first become infected with the herpes simplex virus. An outbreak of cold sores may happen some time later. Cold sores often start with a tingling, itching or burning sensation around your mouth. Small fluid-filled sores then appear, usually on the edges of your lower lip. Read more about the symptoms of cold sores. When to visit your GP If you've had outbreaks of cold sores before, it's likely that you'll know what they are if they return. You only need to visit your GP if you're unsure whether it's a cold sore or if it's severe and spreading further than just the lip. See your GP if a cold sore hasn't healed after 7 to 10 days. What causes cold sores? The strain of herpes simplex virus usually responsible for cold sores is known as HSV-1. In rare cases, cold sores can also be caused by the herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2). This can be the result of having oral sex with someone who has genital herpes. Read more about the causes of cold sores. Herpes simplex virus The herpes simplex virus \u2013 or \"cold sore virus\" \u2013 is highly contagious and can be easily passed from person to person by close direct contact. After someone has contracted the virus, it remains inactive (dormant) most of the time. However, every so often the virus can be activated by certain triggers, resulting in an outbreak of cold sores. These triggers vary from person to person, but can include sunlight, fatigue, an injury to the affected area, and, in women, their period. Some people have frequently recurring cold sores around two or three times a year, while others have one cold sore and never have another. Some people never get cold sores at all because the virus never becomes active. Treating cold sores Cold sores usually clear up by themselves without treatment within 7 to 10 days. However, antiviral creams are available over the counter from pharmacies without a prescription. If used correctly, these can help ease your symptoms and speed up the healing time. To be effective, these treatments should be applied as soon as the first signs of a cold sore appear \u2013 when you feel a tingling, itching or burning sensation around your mouth. Using an antiviral cream after this initial period is unlikely to have much of an effect. Cold sore patches are also available that contain hydrocolloid gel, which is an effective treatment for skin wounds. The patch is placed over the cold sore while it heals. Antiviral tablets may be prescribed for severe cases. Read more about treating cold sores. Complications of cold sores Cold sores are usually mild, but may cause complications in rare cases. People with weak immune systems caused by illness or treatments such as chemotherapy are particularly at risk of complications. Dehydration sometimes occurs if drinking fluids becomes painful. Young children are particularly at risk of becoming dehydrated. The herpes simplex virus can also spread to other parts of your body. Examples of when this can occur include: skin infections \u2013 these often occur if the virus comes into contact with broken skin, such as a cut or graze, or a skin condition such as eczema herpetic whitlow (whitlow finger) \u2013 this causes painful sores and blisters to appear on and around your fingers herpetic keratoconjunctivitis \u2013 this causes swelling and irritation (inflammation) of your eye area and sores to develop on your eyelids Left untreated, herpetic keratoconjunctivitis can cause the cornea, the transparent layer at the front of your eye, to become infected, which can eventually lead to blindness. It's therefore important not to touch your eyes if you have an unhealed cold sore. If you must touch your eyes \u2013 for example, to remove contact lenses \u2013 wash your hands thoroughly first. In very rare cases, encephalitis, a condition where the brain becomes inflamed and swollen, can be caused by the cold sore virus spreading to the brain. It can be treated with intravenous injections of antiviral medications, such as aciclovir. Preventing infection It's not possible to prevent infection with the herpes simplex virus or prevent outbreaks of cold sores, but you can take steps to minimise the spread of infection. Cold sores are at their most contagious when they burst (rupture), but remain contagious until they're completely healed. Avoid close contact with others until your cold sore has completely healed and disappeared. However, there's no need to stay away from work or miss school if you or your child have a cold sore. You can help minimise the risk of the cold sore virus spreading and cold sores recurring by following the advice below: avoid touching cold sores unless you're applying cold sore cream \u2013 creams should be dabbed on gently rather than rubbed in, as this can damage your skin further always wash your hands before and after applying cold sore cream and after touching the affected area don't share cold sore creams or medication with other people as this can cause the infection to spread don't share items that come into contact with the affected area, such as lipsticks or cutlery avoid kissing and oral sex until your cold sores have completely healed be particularly careful around newborn babies, pregnant women and people with a low immune system, such as those with HIV or those having chemotherapy if you know what usually triggers your cold sores, try to avoid the triggers \u2013 for example, a sun block lip balm (SPF 15 or higher) may help prevent cold sores triggered by bright sunlight Page last reviewed: 25\/04\/2016 Next review due: 25\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 729 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 352  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 181  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Genital herpes Herpes in a newborn baby (neonatal herpes) Itching What are the incubation periods for infections? External links FPA: genital herpes Herpes Viruses Association KidsHealth: coping with cold sores Water and drinks Find out how much you need to drink and how to choose healthier soft drinks NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Herpes in a newborn baby (neonatal herpes)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neonatal-herpes","content":"Neonatal herpes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neonatal herpes (herpes in a baby)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neonatal herpes Introduction  'Neonatal herpes' is a herpes infection in a newborn baby. It's caused by the herpes simplex virus, a highly contagious virus that can cause cold sores and genital ulcers in adults. Herpes can be very serious for a young baby, whose immune system won't have fully developed to fight off the virus. Thankfully, neonatal herpes is rare in the UK and can be prevented by following some simple advice. How does a newborn baby catch herpes? During pregnancy and labour A newborn baby is at risk of catching herpes if the mother had genital herpes for the first time within the last six weeks of her pregnancy. There's a risk the mother will have passed the infection on to her baby if she had a vaginal delivery.  This risk is much lower if the mother has had previous episodes of genital herpes. Learn more about the risks of genital herpes and pregnancy. After birth The herpes simplex virus can also be passed on to a newborn baby if: a person has a cold sore and kisses the baby the mother breastfeeds her baby with herpes sores on her breast (which can develop after touching her cold sore and then her breast) Cold sores are at their most contagious when they burst (rupture), they remain contagious until completely healed. What are the warning signs in babies? Because newborn babies have under-developed immune systems, they can quickly become seriously ill after catching the virus. A newborn baby infected with herpes may: become listless (lacking in energy) and sleepy stop feeding be floppy have a fever (read how to take your baby's temperature) have a high-pitched cry have breathing difficulties or start grunting breath rapidly have a blue tongue and skin (cyanosis) have a rash The baby's health can deteriorate quickly if the virus spreads to their brain or other parts of their body. What should you do if you think your baby has it? Contact your GP or midwife as soon as possible if your baby has any of the above symptoms and you're worried. You may be advised to take your baby to A&E. Find your nearest A&E. Neonatal herpes is usually treated with antiviral drugs given directly into the baby's vein (intravenously). This treatment may be needed for several weeks. Any related complications, such as seizures, will also need to be treated. The baby can be breastfed while receiving treatment, unless the mother has herpes sores around her nipples. If the mother is taking antiviral treatment too, this can be excreted in her breast milk but is not thought to cause any harm to the baby. How serious is herpes for a baby? Sometimes neonatal herpes will only affect the baby's eyes, mouth or skin. In these cases, most babies will make a complete recovery with antiviral treatment. However, the condition is much more serious if it has spread to the baby's organs. Nearly a third of infants with this type of neonatal herpes will die, even after they've been treated. If widespread herpes is not immediately treated, there's a high chance the baby will die.  How can neonatal herpes be prevented? If you're pregnant and have a history of genital herpes, tell your doctor or midwife. You may need to take medication during the last month of pregnancy to prevent an outbreak of vaginal sores during labour. Delivery by caesarean section is recommended if the genital herpes has occurred for the first time in the last six weeks of your pregnancy.  If you develop a cold sore, or think you're coming down with a herpes infection, take these precautions: don't kiss any babies wash your hands before contact with a baby wash your hands before breastfeeding and cover up any cold sores, to avoid accidentally touching your mouth and then breast (this is enough to transfer the virus) Support and advice if you\u2019ve been affected You may find these resources helpful: World Health Organization (WHO) factsheet: herpes simplex virus NHS: cold sores NHS: genital herpes Sands (stillbirth neonatal death charity)   Page last reviewed: 14\/08\/2015 Next review due: 14\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cold sores Genital herpes What are the risks of genital herpes during pregnancy? How to take your baby's temperature External links Sands - stillbirth and neonatal death charity Poster: neonatal herpes (PDF, 6.1 Mb) Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Does your child have a serious illness? Learn the warning signs that your baby or toddler may be seriously ill NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Colic","content":"Colic - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Colic  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Colic Clinical trials Colic Colic Treatment Introduction  Colic is the name for excessive, frequent crying in a baby who appears to be otherwise healthy. It's a common problem that affects up to one in five babies. Colic tends to begin when a baby is a few weeks old. It normally stops by four months of age, or by six months at the latest. Looking after a colicky baby can be very frustrating and distressing, but the problem will eventually pass and is usually nothing to worry about. Does my baby have colic? Signs and symptoms of colic include: intense crying bouts crying in the late afternoon or evening that lasts several hours your baby's face being red and flushed when they cry your baby clenching their fists, drawing their knees up to their tummy, or arching their back while crying If your baby has colic, they may appear to be in distress. But the crying outbursts are not harmful, and your baby should continue to feed and gain weight normally. Advice for parents  Caring for a baby with colic can be very difficult for parents, particularly first-time parents. It's important to remember that: your baby's colic is not your fault \u2013 it doesn't mean your baby is unwell, you're doing something wrong, or your baby is rejecting you your baby will get better eventually \u2013 colic normally stops before they're four to six months old you should look after your own wellbeing \u2013 if possible, ask friends and family for support as it's important to take regular breaks and get some rest Support groups, such as Cry-sis, can also offer help and advice if you need it. You can contact the Cry-sis helpline for advice on 0845 122 8669 (9am-10pm, seven days a week). Tips for helping your baby There's no method that works for all babies with colic, but there are a number of techniques that may help. These include: holding your baby during a crying episode preventing your baby swallowing air by sitting or holding them upright during feeding burping your baby after feeds gently rocking your baby over your shoulder bathing your baby in a warm bath gently massaging your baby's tummy Some babies may also benefit from changes to their diet, such as adding drops to breast or bottle milk that aid digestion and release any bubbles of trapped air in your baby's digestive system. Speak to a GP or pharmacist for advice before trying these. Read more about treatments for colic. Do I need to see my GP? Colic may improve using the techniques mentioned above. You can also ask your health visitor for their advice. See your GP if you're concerned about your baby, or if nothing seems to be working and you're struggling to cope. Your GP can check for possible causes of your baby's crying, such as eczema or gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD). GORD is a condition where stomach acid moves back out of the stomach and into the gullet (oesophagus). If no other cause of your baby's symptoms can be found, your GP can advise you about the things you can do to help your baby, including what treatments are available. When to seek immediate medical advice You should get medical help immediately if your baby: has a weak, high-pitched, or continuous cry seems floppy when you pick them up isn't feeding vomits green fluid has blood in their poo  has a fever of 38C or above (if they're less than three months old) or 39C or above (if they're three to six months old) has a bulging fontanelle (the soft spot at the top of a baby's head) has a fit (seizure) turns blue, blotchy, or very pale has breathing problems, such as breathing quickly or grunting while breathing These symptoms can indicate a more serious problem. Read about spotting signs of serious illness in children for information about what to look for and where you should go for help. What causes colic? The cause or causes of colic are unknown, but a number of theories have been suggested. These include indigestion, trapped wind, or a temporary gut sensitivity to certain proteins and sugars found in breast and formula milk.  It has also been suggested colic may just be at the extreme end of normal crying in babies. Colic occurs equally in boys and girls, and both in babies who are breastfed and those who are bottle-fed. Other types of colic This article focuses on infantile or baby colic. Other types of colic include: biliary colic \u2013 caused by gallstones renal colic \u2013 caused by kidney stones The main symptom of these types of colic is sudden, intense abdominal (tummy) pain. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 161 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coping with stress Services and support for parents Soothing a crying baby External links Cry-sis Family Lives NCT: coping with colic Soothing a crying baby It can be hard to know what a crying baby needs, especially in the early days. Use these tips to help soothe them Helping your baby to sleep Tips to help your baby sleep, including where they should sleep and establishing a routine NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Collarbone injury","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/broken-collarbone","content":"Broken collarbone - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Broken collarbone  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Broken collarbone Introduction  A broken collarbone, or fractured clavicle, is a common injury. It usually happens after a fall or a blow to the shoulder. It takes about six to eight weeks to heal in adults, and three to six weeks in children. The collarbone, or clavicle, is a long slender bone that runs from the breastbone to each of the shoulders. You should be able to feel it running across the top of your chest, just below your neck. It is connected to the breastbone and shoulder blade via tough bands of tissue called ligaments. See your GP straight away if you've injured your collarbone. If your GP thinks it's fractured, they'll refer you to hospital for an X-ray to confirm the injury and have it treated with a sling and brace.  If you can't see your GP or if the injury is severe \u2013 for example, the bone is poking through the skin or the pain is unbearable \u2013 go straight to your nearest hospital accident and emergency (A&E) department. This page summarises the signs of a broken or cracked collarbone, and explains what you can do while you wait to see the doctor and how this injury is treated.  Signs of a broken collarbone A cracked or broken collarbone will be extremely painful. There may also be: swelling or tenderness around the injured area bruising to the skin bleeding if the bone has damaged the tissue and skin (this is rare) numbness or pins and needles if nerves in the arm are injured Your shoulder may be slumped downwards and forwards under the weight of the arm, as the broken collarbone is no longer providing support. You may have heard a snap or a grinding noise during the accident. In very severe cases, one end of the bone may poke through the skin. What you should do While you wait to see a doctor, stabilise the arm by using a towel as a sling (this goes under the forearm and then around the neck). Try to move the arm as little as possible. Take over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, to reduce the pain \u2013 aspirin shouldn't be given to children aged under 16. Hold an ice pack to the injured area \u2013 try a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel. This can help reduce pain and swelling. Don't apply ice directly to the skin as it can burn. How a broken collarbone is treated Most broken collarbones are left to heal naturally using a simple triangular sling to support the arm and hold the bones together in their normal positions. The sling is usually applied in hospital after an X-ray has confirmed the collarbone is broken. You'll be given painkillers to relieve the pain.   Surgery under a general anaesthetic is only needed if the injury is severe \u2013 for example, the bone has broken through the skin \u2013 or if the bones have failed to line up and are overlapping significantly. Many different techniques have been used to repair the collarbone, but the most common is to fix the break with a plate and screws. If you need surgery to repair your broken collarbone, ask your surgeon to explain which technique they'll be using, and the advantages and disadvantages of this method. Being discharged You may need to stay in hospital overnight, depending on the extent of the injury. Before you're discharged, you may see a physiotherapist, who can show you some gentle arm and shoulder exercises to do at home with your arm out of its sling. These will help reduce stiffness, relieve some of the pain, and build up strength in your shoulder muscles. Follow-up You'll probably need to go back to the hospital outpatient department about one week later to make sure your collarbone is healing properly. See your GP if you have any concerns before this appointment. You should go back to the A&E department if you notice any weakness developing in your arm or hand, or if your pain suddenly becomes worse. How long does it take to heal? In adults, it usually takes about six to eight weeks for a broken collarbone to heal, although it can take longer. In children, it usually takes about three to six weeks to heal. However, it will take at least the same period again to restore full strength to your shoulder. While the fracture heals, a lump may develop along the collarbone. This is normal and often improves over the following months. Occasionally, the fracture doesn't heal (non-union) and you may need to have surgery. This should be discussed with your surgeon. Recovery advice You may find the following advice helpful while recovering from a broken collarbone: use extra pillows at night to keep yourself more upright if you find sleeping uncomfortable use ice packs and painkillers if pain and swelling continues while your arm is in a sling try to move your elbow, hand and fingers regularly as soon as it's comfortable to do so when you think the fracture has started to heal, try removing the sling for short periods at a time if it's not too painful avoid contact sports for at least 10 to 12 weeks after the injury \u2013 your doctor will tell you when you can go back to work and resume normal activities It's important to let your arm hang freely. Avoid resting your arms and elbows on chairs, tables, pillows or inside the sleeves of clothes until you've healed. Page last reviewed: 14\/04\/2015 Next review due: 14\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 395 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Broken arm Shoulder pain Find A&E services External links Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) First aid What to do if someone is injured in an accident Dislocated shoulder How to tell if your arm has popped out of its socket, and information on treatment and recovery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colon cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel","content":"Bowel cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bowel cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Real stories Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Community Bowel cancer Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Symptoms Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Causes Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Treatment Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Living with Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Prevention Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Screening Introduction  Bowel cancer is a general term for cancer that begins in the large bowel. Depending on where the cancer starts, bowel cancer is sometimes called colon or rectal cancer. Cancer can sometimes start in the small bowel (small intestine), but small bowel cancer is much rarer than large bowel cancer. Bowel cancer is one of the most common types of cancer diagnosed in the UK, with around 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. About 1 in every 20 people in the UK will develop bowel cancer in their lifetime. Signs and symptoms The three main symptoms of bowel cancer are blood in the stools (faeces), changes in bowel habit \u2013 such as more frequent, looser stools \u2013 and abdominal (tummy) pain. However, these symptoms are very common and most people with them do not have bowel cancer. For example, blood in the stools is more often caused by haemorrhoids (piles), and a change in bowel habit or abdominal pain is usually the result of something you have eaten. As almost 9 out of 10 people with bowel cancer are over the age of 60, these symptoms are more important as people get older. They are also more significant when they persist despite simple treatments. Most people who are eventually diagnosed with bowel cancer have one of the following combination of symptoms: a persistent change in bowel habit that causes them to go to the toilet more often and pass looser stools, usually together with blood on or in their stools a persistent change in bowel habit without blood in their stools, but with abdominal pain blood in the stools without other haemorrhoid symptoms, such as soreness, discomfort, pain, itching or a lump hanging down outside the back passage abdominal pain, discomfort or bloating always provoked by eating, sometimes resulting in a reduction in the amount of food eaten and weight loss The symptoms of bowel cancer can be subtle and don't necessarily make you feel ill. Read more about the symptoms of bowel cancer. When to seek medical advice Try the bowel cancer symptom checker for advice on treatments you can try to see if your symptoms get better, and when you should see your GP to discuss whether any tests are necessary. Your doctor will probably carry out a simple examination of your tummy and bottom to make sure you have no lumps. They may also arrange for a simple blood test to check for iron deficiency anaemia \u2013 this can indicate whether there is any bleeding from your bowel that you haven't been aware of. In some cases, your doctor may decide it is best for you to have a simple test in hospital to make sure there is no serious cause for your symptoms. Make sure you return to your doctor if your symptoms persist or keep coming back after stopping treatment, regardless of their severity or your age. Read more about diagnosing bowel cancer. Who's at risk? It's not known exactly what causes bowel cancer, but there are a number of things that can increase your risk. These include: age \u2013 almost 9 in 10 cases of bowel cancer occur in people aged 60 or over diet \u2013 a diet high in red or processed meats and low in fibre can increase your risk weight \u2013 bowel cancer is more common in people who are overweight or obese exercise \u2013 being inactive increases the risk of getting bowel cancer alcohol and smoking \u2013 a high alcohol intake and smoking may increase your chances of getting bowel cancer family history \u2013 having a close relative (mother or father, brother or sister) who developed bowel cancer under the age of 50 puts you at a greater lifetime risk of developing the condition Some people have an increased risk of bowel cancer because they have another condition that affects their bowel, such as severe ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, over a long period of time. Read more about the causes of bowel cancer and preventing bowel cancer. Bowel cancer screening To detect cases of bowel cancer sooner, the NHS offers two types of bowel cancer screening to adults registered with a GP in England: faecal occult blood (FOB) test \u2013 all men and women aged 60 to 74 are invited to carry out an FOB test at home. They're sent the home test kit every two years through the post until they reach the age of 74. The FOB test checks for the presence of blood in a stool sample, which could be an early sign of bowel cancer. bowel scope screening \u2013 this additional one-off test is being gradually introduced in England. It is offered to men and women at the age of 55. As of March 2015, about two-thirds of screening centres were beginning to offer this test to 55-year-olds. It involves a doctor or nurse using a thin, flexible instrument to look inside the lower part of the bowel and remove any small growths called polyps, which could eventually turn into cancer. Screening plays an important part in the fight against bowel cancer as it can help detect bowel cancer before it causes obvious symptoms, which increases the chances of people surviving the condition. Read more about screening for bowel cancer. Treatment and outlook Bowel cancer can be treated using a combination of different treatments, depending on where the cancer is in your bowel and how far it has spread. The main treatments are: surgery \u2013 the cancerous section of bowel is removed; it is the most effective way of curing bowel cancer, and is all that many people need chemotherapy \u2013 where medication is used to kill cancer cells  radiotherapy \u2013 where radiation is used to kill cancer cells biological treatments \u2013 a newer type of medication that increases the effectiveness of chemotherapy and prevents the cancer spreading As with most types of cancer, the chances of a complete cure depends on how far it has advanced by the time it is diagnosed. If the cancer is confined to the bowel, surgery will usually be able to completely remove it. Overall, 7 to 8 in every 10 people with bowel cancer will live at least one year after diagnosis. More than half of those diagnosed will live at least another 10 years. Every year, around 16,000 people die as a result of bowel cancer. Read more about how bowel cancer is treated and living with bowel cancer. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS bodies that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for bowel cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 788 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 389  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 193  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_63\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Bowel cancer screening Bowel cancer and red meat risk Bowel polyps Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Beating Bowel Cancer Bowel Cancer Information Bowel Cancer UK Cancer Research UK healthtalk.org: colorectal cancer Macmillan Cancer Support My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Bowel Cancer Screening NHS cancer screening There are some types of cancers you can get free routine screening for NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colonic cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel","content":"Bowel cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bowel cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Real stories Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Community Bowel cancer Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Symptoms Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Causes Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Treatment Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Living with Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Prevention Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Screening Introduction  Bowel cancer is a general term for cancer that begins in the large bowel. Depending on where the cancer starts, bowel cancer is sometimes called colon or rectal cancer. Cancer can sometimes start in the small bowel (small intestine), but small bowel cancer is much rarer than large bowel cancer. Bowel cancer is one of the most common types of cancer diagnosed in the UK, with around 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. About 1 in every 20 people in the UK will develop bowel cancer in their lifetime. Signs and symptoms The three main symptoms of bowel cancer are blood in the stools (faeces), changes in bowel habit \u2013 such as more frequent, looser stools \u2013 and abdominal (tummy) pain. However, these symptoms are very common and most people with them do not have bowel cancer. For example, blood in the stools is more often caused by haemorrhoids (piles), and a change in bowel habit or abdominal pain is usually the result of something you have eaten. As almost 9 out of 10 people with bowel cancer are over the age of 60, these symptoms are more important as people get older. They are also more significant when they persist despite simple treatments. Most people who are eventually diagnosed with bowel cancer have one of the following combination of symptoms: a persistent change in bowel habit that causes them to go to the toilet more often and pass looser stools, usually together with blood on or in their stools a persistent change in bowel habit without blood in their stools, but with abdominal pain blood in the stools without other haemorrhoid symptoms, such as soreness, discomfort, pain, itching or a lump hanging down outside the back passage abdominal pain, discomfort or bloating always provoked by eating, sometimes resulting in a reduction in the amount of food eaten and weight loss The symptoms of bowel cancer can be subtle and don't necessarily make you feel ill. Read more about the symptoms of bowel cancer. When to seek medical advice Try the bowel cancer symptom checker for advice on treatments you can try to see if your symptoms get better, and when you should see your GP to discuss whether any tests are necessary. Your doctor will probably carry out a simple examination of your tummy and bottom to make sure you have no lumps. They may also arrange for a simple blood test to check for iron deficiency anaemia \u2013 this can indicate whether there is any bleeding from your bowel that you haven't been aware of. In some cases, your doctor may decide it is best for you to have a simple test in hospital to make sure there is no serious cause for your symptoms. Make sure you return to your doctor if your symptoms persist or keep coming back after stopping treatment, regardless of their severity or your age. Read more about diagnosing bowel cancer. Who's at risk? It's not known exactly what causes bowel cancer, but there are a number of things that can increase your risk. These include: age \u2013 almost 9 in 10 cases of bowel cancer occur in people aged 60 or over diet \u2013 a diet high in red or processed meats and low in fibre can increase your risk weight \u2013 bowel cancer is more common in people who are overweight or obese exercise \u2013 being inactive increases the risk of getting bowel cancer alcohol and smoking \u2013 a high alcohol intake and smoking may increase your chances of getting bowel cancer family history \u2013 having a close relative (mother or father, brother or sister) who developed bowel cancer under the age of 50 puts you at a greater lifetime risk of developing the condition Some people have an increased risk of bowel cancer because they have another condition that affects their bowel, such as severe ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, over a long period of time. Read more about the causes of bowel cancer and preventing bowel cancer. Bowel cancer screening To detect cases of bowel cancer sooner, the NHS offers two types of bowel cancer screening to adults registered with a GP in England: faecal occult blood (FOB) test \u2013 all men and women aged 60 to 74 are invited to carry out an FOB test at home. They're sent the home test kit every two years through the post until they reach the age of 74. The FOB test checks for the presence of blood in a stool sample, which could be an early sign of bowel cancer. bowel scope screening \u2013 this additional one-off test is being gradually introduced in England. It is offered to men and women at the age of 55. As of March 2015, about two-thirds of screening centres were beginning to offer this test to 55-year-olds. It involves a doctor or nurse using a thin, flexible instrument to look inside the lower part of the bowel and remove any small growths called polyps, which could eventually turn into cancer. Screening plays an important part in the fight against bowel cancer as it can help detect bowel cancer before it causes obvious symptoms, which increases the chances of people surviving the condition. Read more about screening for bowel cancer. Treatment and outlook Bowel cancer can be treated using a combination of different treatments, depending on where the cancer is in your bowel and how far it has spread. The main treatments are: surgery \u2013 the cancerous section of bowel is removed; it is the most effective way of curing bowel cancer, and is all that many people need chemotherapy \u2013 where medication is used to kill cancer cells  radiotherapy \u2013 where radiation is used to kill cancer cells biological treatments \u2013 a newer type of medication that increases the effectiveness of chemotherapy and prevents the cancer spreading As with most types of cancer, the chances of a complete cure depends on how far it has advanced by the time it is diagnosed. If the cancer is confined to the bowel, surgery will usually be able to completely remove it. Overall, 7 to 8 in every 10 people with bowel cancer will live at least one year after diagnosis. More than half of those diagnosed will live at least another 10 years. Every year, around 16,000 people die as a result of bowel cancer. Read more about how bowel cancer is treated and living with bowel cancer. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS bodies that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for bowel cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 788 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 389  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 193  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_63\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Bowel cancer screening Bowel cancer and red meat risk Bowel polyps Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Beating Bowel Cancer Bowel Cancer Information Bowel Cancer UK Cancer Research UK healthtalk.org: colorectal cancer Macmillan Cancer Support My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Bowel Cancer Screening NHS cancer screening There are some types of cancers you can get free routine screening for NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colonic irrigation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/chq\/pages\/1997.aspx","content":"Is colonic irrigation available on the NHS? - Health questions - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories You are here: Common health questions Is colonic irrigation available on the NHS? Is colonic irrigation available on the NHS? Colonic irrigation is not available on the NHS; you will have to pay for it privately. Prices vary depending on the clinic, but it typically costs around £40-90 for a single session. What is colonic irrigation? Colonic irrigation is a complementary therapy. It involves flushing waste material out of the bowel using water. The procedure is also known as colonic hydrotherapy. Colonic irrigation is carried out by colonic hydrotherapists who may be registered with the Association of Registered Colon Hydrotherapists (ARCH). Before having colonic irrigation, the therapist should ask you about your medical history to check you do not have any health problems that might make the treatment inadvisable (these are listed below). During the procedure, you will lie on your side while warm water is passed into your bowel through a tube inserted into your rectum (back passage). The water circulates through your colon, and waste products are passed out of your body through the tube. The procedure lasts about 30-45 minutes, during which around 60 litres of water is introduced into the rectum. Herbal infusions are sometimes added to the water. Does colonic irrigation have health benefits? Despite many people having colonic irrigation, there is no scientific evidence to suggest there are any health benefits associated with the procedure. In 2011, researchers in America analysed studies about the procedure, but found no strong scientific evidence to support it. Is colonic irrigation safe? ARCH recommends that you should not have colonic irrigation if you have: an active infection active inflammation, such as diverticulitis, Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis painful fissures painful haemorrhoids heart problems uncontrolled high blood pressure (hypertension) kidney disease cirrhosis pregnancy at any stage Read the answers to more questions about NHS services and treatments. Further information: constipation diarrhoea digestive health irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) Page last reviewed: 18\/04\/2015 Next review due: 17\/04\/2017 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colorectal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel","content":"Bowel cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bowel cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Real stories Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Community Bowel cancer Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Symptoms Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Causes Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Treatment Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Living with Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Prevention Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Screening Introduction  Bowel cancer is a general term for cancer that begins in the large bowel. Depending on where the cancer starts, bowel cancer is sometimes called colon or rectal cancer. Cancer can sometimes start in the small bowel (small intestine), but small bowel cancer is much rarer than large bowel cancer. Bowel cancer is one of the most common types of cancer diagnosed in the UK, with around 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. About 1 in every 20 people in the UK will develop bowel cancer in their lifetime. Signs and symptoms The three main symptoms of bowel cancer are blood in the stools (faeces), changes in bowel habit \u2013 such as more frequent, looser stools \u2013 and abdominal (tummy) pain. However, these symptoms are very common and most people with them do not have bowel cancer. For example, blood in the stools is more often caused by haemorrhoids (piles), and a change in bowel habit or abdominal pain is usually the result of something you have eaten. As almost 9 out of 10 people with bowel cancer are over the age of 60, these symptoms are more important as people get older. They are also more significant when they persist despite simple treatments. Most people who are eventually diagnosed with bowel cancer have one of the following combination of symptoms: a persistent change in bowel habit that causes them to go to the toilet more often and pass looser stools, usually together with blood on or in their stools a persistent change in bowel habit without blood in their stools, but with abdominal pain blood in the stools without other haemorrhoid symptoms, such as soreness, discomfort, pain, itching or a lump hanging down outside the back passage abdominal pain, discomfort or bloating always provoked by eating, sometimes resulting in a reduction in the amount of food eaten and weight loss The symptoms of bowel cancer can be subtle and don't necessarily make you feel ill. Read more about the symptoms of bowel cancer. When to seek medical advice Try the bowel cancer symptom checker for advice on treatments you can try to see if your symptoms get better, and when you should see your GP to discuss whether any tests are necessary. Your doctor will probably carry out a simple examination of your tummy and bottom to make sure you have no lumps. They may also arrange for a simple blood test to check for iron deficiency anaemia \u2013 this can indicate whether there is any bleeding from your bowel that you haven't been aware of. In some cases, your doctor may decide it is best for you to have a simple test in hospital to make sure there is no serious cause for your symptoms. Make sure you return to your doctor if your symptoms persist or keep coming back after stopping treatment, regardless of their severity or your age. Read more about diagnosing bowel cancer. Who's at risk? It's not known exactly what causes bowel cancer, but there are a number of things that can increase your risk. These include: age \u2013 almost 9 in 10 cases of bowel cancer occur in people aged 60 or over diet \u2013 a diet high in red or processed meats and low in fibre can increase your risk weight \u2013 bowel cancer is more common in people who are overweight or obese exercise \u2013 being inactive increases the risk of getting bowel cancer alcohol and smoking \u2013 a high alcohol intake and smoking may increase your chances of getting bowel cancer family history \u2013 having a close relative (mother or father, brother or sister) who developed bowel cancer under the age of 50 puts you at a greater lifetime risk of developing the condition Some people have an increased risk of bowel cancer because they have another condition that affects their bowel, such as severe ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, over a long period of time. Read more about the causes of bowel cancer and preventing bowel cancer. Bowel cancer screening To detect cases of bowel cancer sooner, the NHS offers two types of bowel cancer screening to adults registered with a GP in England: faecal occult blood (FOB) test \u2013 all men and women aged 60 to 74 are invited to carry out an FOB test at home. They're sent the home test kit every two years through the post until they reach the age of 74. The FOB test checks for the presence of blood in a stool sample, which could be an early sign of bowel cancer. bowel scope screening \u2013 this additional one-off test is being gradually introduced in England. It is offered to men and women at the age of 55. As of March 2015, about two-thirds of screening centres were beginning to offer this test to 55-year-olds. It involves a doctor or nurse using a thin, flexible instrument to look inside the lower part of the bowel and remove any small growths called polyps, which could eventually turn into cancer. Screening plays an important part in the fight against bowel cancer as it can help detect bowel cancer before it causes obvious symptoms, which increases the chances of people surviving the condition. Read more about screening for bowel cancer. Treatment and outlook Bowel cancer can be treated using a combination of different treatments, depending on where the cancer is in your bowel and how far it has spread. The main treatments are: surgery \u2013 the cancerous section of bowel is removed; it is the most effective way of curing bowel cancer, and is all that many people need chemotherapy \u2013 where medication is used to kill cancer cells  radiotherapy \u2013 where radiation is used to kill cancer cells biological treatments \u2013 a newer type of medication that increases the effectiveness of chemotherapy and prevents the cancer spreading As with most types of cancer, the chances of a complete cure depends on how far it has advanced by the time it is diagnosed. If the cancer is confined to the bowel, surgery will usually be able to completely remove it. Overall, 7 to 8 in every 10 people with bowel cancer will live at least one year after diagnosis. More than half of those diagnosed will live at least another 10 years. Every year, around 16,000 people die as a result of bowel cancer. Read more about how bowel cancer is treated and living with bowel cancer. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS bodies that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for bowel cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 788 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 389  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 193  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_63\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Bowel cancer screening Bowel cancer and red meat risk Bowel polyps Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Beating Bowel Cancer Bowel Cancer Information Bowel Cancer UK Cancer Research UK healthtalk.org: colorectal cancer Macmillan Cancer Support My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Bowel Cancer Screening NHS cancer screening There are some types of cancers you can get free routine screening for NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colostomy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Colostomy","content":"Colostomy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Colostomy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Colostomy Clinical trials Colostomy Colostomy How it's performed Colostomy Recovery Colostomy Complications Colostomy Living with Colostomy Reversal Introduction  A colostomy is a surgical procedure to divert one end of the large intestine (colon) through an opening in the abdominal wall (tummy). The end of the bowel is called a stoma. A pouch is placed over the stoma to collect waste products that usually pass through the colon and out of the body through the rectum and anus (back passage). A colostomy can be permanent or temporary. It's estimated that around 6,400 permanent colostomies are carried out each year in the UK. Why a colostomy may be needed A colostomy may be used when there's a problem with an area of the colon. The colostomy diverts digestive waste away from the affected area, to give it a chance to heal. In other cases, a colostomy is formed after a section of the colon has been removed and the bowel can't be joined back together. This may only be temporary, with a further operation to remove the colostomy at a later date, or it may be permanent. A colostomy may be used to treat the following conditions: Bowel cancer Crohn's disease Diverticulitis Anal cancer \u2013 In rare cases, a permanent colostomy may be needed to treat anal cancer. This is usually only necessary if other treatments, such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy, have been unsuccessful. Vaginal cancer or cervical cancer \u2013 In some cases, a major operation known as a pelvic exenteration is required to treat cancer that has spread into the pelvis. A permanent colostomy is required as part of the operation. Bowel incontinence \u2013 A colostomy can be formed as a last resort, if all other medical and surgical treatments prove unsuccessful. Injury \u2013 If a part of the colon needs to be removed following an injury, such as a knife or gunshot wound, a colostomy may need to be formed. The colostomy is usually temporary, but in some cases can become permanent. Hirschsprung's disease \u2013 In this rare disease, the bowel doesn't work because it lacks the necessary nerve cells. Surgery is sometimes required to prevent the colon from becoming blocked. During the operation, the section of the colon lacking the nerve cells is removed and a colostomy is formed, so stools can leave the body. Depending on how much of the colon is removed, the colostomy may be temporary or permanent. Types of colostomy There are two main ways a colostomy can be formed: A loop colostomy \u2013 where a loop of colon is pulled out through a hole in your abdomen, before being opened up and stitched to the skin. An end colostomy \u2013 where one end of the colon is pulled out through a hole in your abdomen and stitched to the skin. Loop colostomies tend to be temporary and require a further operation at a later date to reverse the procedure. It's also possible to reverse an end colostomy, but this is less common. You'll usually have to stay in hospital for 3-10 days after a colostomy or colostomy reversal. A similar procedure, known as an ileostomy, is sometimes used as an alternative to a colostomy. This involves creating a stoma by diverting the small intestine instead of the large intestine. Read more about: how colostomies are performed recovering from a colostomy colostomy reversal Living with a colostomy It's natural to be concerned that your day-to-day activities will be restricted and that others will notice you're wearing a colostomy bag. However, modern colostomy equipment is discreet and secure, and there's no reason why you shouldn't be able to do the activities you enjoyed before, without experiencing the symptoms that made the colostomy necessary in the first place. Adjusting to life with a colostomy can be challenging, but most people become accustomed to it over time. You'll usually see a specialist stoma nurse before and after having a colostomy, although you may not be able to see them before the procedure if it's carried out in an emergency. Specialist stoma nurses can offer support and advice to help you adapt to life with a colostomy. Read more about: living with a colostomy complications of a colostomy The Colostomy Association The Colostomy Association is the leading charity for people in England who are living with a colostomy. Its website provides a range of useful information, plus a selection of products that you may find useful. It also contains details of local support groups. Page last reviewed: 28\/04\/2015 Next review due: 28\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 181 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bowel cancer Crohn's disease Diverticulitis Living with cancer Digestive health Find stoma services near you External links Colostomy Association Cancer Research UK Ostomyland: ostomy support Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer 'My life with Crohn's disease' Fame Academy voice coach Carrie Grant talks about living with Crohn's disease since she was 18 Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colour vision deficiency","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Colour-vision-deficiency","content":"Colour vision deficiency (colour blindness) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Colour vision deficiency (colour blindness)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Colour-vision-deficiency Clinical trials Colour vision deficiency   People with colour vision deficiency find it difficult to identify and distinguish between certain colours. It's sometimes called being \"colour blind\", although total colour blindness (an inability to see any colour) is very rare. Colour vision deficiency is usually passed on to a child by their parents (inherited) and is present from birth, although sometimes it can develop later in life. Most people are able to adapt to colour vision deficiency and it's rarely a sign of anything serious. This page covers: Types and symptoms of colour vision deficiency Tests for colour vision deficiency Issues for people with a colour vision deficiency Treating and living with a colour vision deficiency Causes of colour vision deficiency How colour vision deficiency is inherited Types and symptoms of colour vision deficiency Most people with colour vision deficiency have difficulty distinguishing between shades of red, yellow and green. This is known as \"red-green\" colour vision deficiency. It's a common problem that affects around 1 in 12 men and 1 in 200 women. Someone with this type of colour vision deficiency may: find it hard to tell the difference between reds, oranges, yellows, browns and greens see these colours as much duller than they would appear to someone with normal vision have trouble distinguishing between shades of purple confuse reds with black In rare cases, some people have trouble with blues, greens and yellows instead. This is known as \"blue-yellow\" colour vision deficiency. Tests for colour vision deficiency Ask for a colour vision test at an opticians if you think you or your child may have a colour vision deficiency \u2013 particularly if it started suddenly or is getting worse. Colour vision tests don't usually form part of the routine NHS eye test, but you can specifically ask for them. Two of the main tests used to diagnose colour vision deficiency are: the Ishihara test \u2013 where you're asked to identify numbers contained within images made up of different coloured dots colour arrangement \u2013 where you're asked to arrange coloured objects in order of their different shades There are a number of online tests using similar techniques that may help detect a possible problem, but it's best to have a proper test at an opticians if you have any concerns about your colour vision. Issues for people with a colour vision deficiency Colour vision deficiency isn't usually anything to be concerned about. Most people get used to it over time, it won't normally get any worse and it's rarely a sign of anything serious. However, it can sometimes cause issues such as: difficulty at school if colours are used to help with learning problems with food, such as identifying whether meat is fully cooked or whether fruit is ripe getting medications confused if they're not clearly labelled trouble identifying safety warnings or signs slightly limited career choices \u2013 certain jobs, such as pilots, train drivers, electricians and air traffic controllers, may require accurate colour recognition Overall, many people with a colour vision deficiency have few, if any, difficulties. They can do most normal activities, including driving. Treating and living with a colour vision deficiency There's currently no cure for inherited colour vision deficiency, although most people are able to adapt to it over time. It may help to: tell your child's school if they have problems with their colour vision, so learning materials can be adapted accordingly ask your friends or family for help \u2013 for example, they can help you choose matching clothes and check whether food is safe to eat install good quality lighting in your home to help you distinguish colours  make use of technology \u2013 computers and other electronic devices often have settings you can change to make them easier to use, and there are a number of mobile phone apps available that can help identify colours for you try special tinted lenses \u2013 these are worn in one or both eyes to help you distinguish between certain colours, although they only seem to work for some people Visit Colour Blind Awareness for more information and advice about living with colour vision deficiency. If your colour vision deficiency is caused by an underlying condition or a medication (see below), your symptoms may improve by treating the cause or by using an different medicine. Causes of colour vision deficiency In the vast majority of cases, colour vision deficiency is caused by a genetic fault passed on to a child by their parents (see below). It occurs because some of the colour sensitive cells in the eyes, called cones, are either missing or don't work properly. Occasionally, colour vision deficiency may develop later in life as the result of: an underlying health condition \u2013 such as diabetes, glaucoma, age-related macular degeneration and multiple sclerosis  a side effect of a medication \u2013 including digoxin, ethambutol, chloroquine, hydroxychloroqine, phenytoin and sildenafil exposure to harmful chemicals \u2013 such as carbon disulphide and styrene Many people also find it more difficult to distinguish between colours as they get older. This is normally just a natural part of the ageing process. How colour vision deficiency is inherited The genetic fault that usually causes colour vision deficiency is passed on in what's known as an X-linked inheritance pattern. This means: it mainly affects boys, but can affect girls in some cases girls are usually carriers of the genetic fault \u2013 this means they can pass it on to their children, but don't have a colour vision deficiency themselves it's usually passed on by a mother to her son \u2013 the mother will often be unaffected as she will normally just be a carrier of the genetic fault fathers with a colour vision deficiency won't have children with the problem unless their partner is a carrier of the genetic fault it can often skip a generation \u2013 for example, it may affect a grandfather and their grandson girls are only affected if their father has a colour vision deficiency and their mother is a carrier of the genetic fault Visit Colour Blind Awareness for more information about inherited colour vision deficiency, including diagrams illustrating how it can be passed on. Page last reviewed: 25\/04\/2016 Next review due: 25\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 61 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Eye health Find an optician Eye tests for children External links Colour Blind Awareness Eyecare Trust: colour vision deficiency Easyhealth: eye problems Look after your eyes: colour vision Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery Eye health tips for over-60s How to keep your eyes healthy as you get older, with regular eye tests, prescription lenses and self-help measures Find an opticians near you Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Colposcopy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Colposcopy","content":"Colposcopy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Colposcopy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Colposcopy Clinical trials Colposcopy Colposcopy Why it's used Colposcopy What happens Colposcopy Results Colposcopy Treatment Introduction  A colposcopy is a procedure to find out whether there are abnormal cells on or in a woman's cervix or vagina. The cervix is the part of the womb that sits in the vagina. Abnormalities tend to occur at the opening of the cervix to the birth canal, where it enters the womb. A colposcopy allows a doctor or trained nurse to find these abnormalities. In some women, the presence of \"abnormal cells\" carries the risk of developing cervical cancer. A colposcopy is used to determine whether treatment will be needed to deal with these cells. When a colposcopy is needed You may need a colposcopy after having a routine cervical screening test. Other reasons for having a colposcopy may include: some of the cells in your cervical screening sample are abnormal (but not necessarily cancerous) you are infected with human papillomavirus (HPV), which is the main cause of the abnormal cell changes and might lead to cancer you've had several screening tests, but it wasn't possible to give you a result the nurse or doctor who carried out your screening test thought your cervix didn't look as healthy as it should A colposcopy can also be used to investigate things such as unexplained vaginal bleeding (for example, after sex) or an inflamed cervix. Read more about why a colposcopy is used. What happens during a colposcopy? The procedure is usually carried out in an outpatient hospital clinic by a specialist called a colposcopist. This can be a doctor or a specially trained nurse. You'll be asked to lie down in a special type of chair with padded supports to rest your legs on. A device called a speculum will be inserted into your vagina and gently opened to allow the colposcopist to examine your cervix. A microscope (colposcope) with a strong light will be used to look at your cervix. The colposcope doesn't enter the vagina and remains outside your body. If the colposcope has a camera attached to it, you may be able to see images of your cervix on a small screen. Some solutions will be applied to the cervix to highlight the abnormal areas. If any abnormal areas are identified, a small sample of tissue (a biopsy) may be removed for closer examination. A biopsy is similar to a small pinch or scratch in terms of sensation, and shouldn\u2019t be too painful. The purpose of a biopsy is to confirm whether your screening test has been correct in identifying a problem. However, the colposcopist will sometimes be confident that the screening test has been correct without the need for a biopsy, and may decide to proceed immediately to treatment (see below). The colposcopy procedure usually takes about five minutes, but it can take longer (10 to 15 minutes) if treatment is carried out. Overall, including the time it takes to discuss your problem with the colposcopist, your appointment should last 20 to 30 minutes. A colposcopy can be slightly uncomfortable for some women. If you find it painful, you should tell the colposcopist, who will try to deal with your discomfort or stop the procedure entirely. Read more about what happens during a colposcopy. Colposcopy results The colposcopist will usually be able to tell straight away if there are abnormal cells in your cervix. Biopsy results usually take about four weeks and a copy will be sent to both you and your GP in the post. About 4 out of 10 women who have a colposcopy have a normal result. A normal result means your cervix appears healthy and you have a low risk of developing cervical cancer before your next screening test. Depending on your age, you'll be invited for a cervical screening appointment in three or five years. About 6 out of 10 women who have a colposcopy have abnormal cells in their cervix. This doesn't mean they are cancerous cells, but they can sometimes develop into cancer if left untreated. Very rarely, some women are found to have cervical cancer during a colposcopy. If you have cancer, you'll be quickly referred to a specialist team for care and treatment. As cervical cancer detected through screening tends to be diagnosed at an early stage, the outcome of treatment tends to be better. This is why it's important for women to attend their screening test when invited. Read more about colposcopy results. Colposcopy treatment Mild abnormalities don't always need to be treated. If treatment is needed, the aim is to remove the abnormal cervical cells while preserving as much normal tissue as possible. The most common treatment is large loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ). The transformation zone is the area of tissue just at the entrance of the birth canal. LLETZ involves using a heated wire loop to remove the abnormal cells, and in the majority of cases is carried out using a local anaesthetic. The procedure lasts a few minutes and can be carried out during a colposcopy. Removing abnormal cervical cells is usually successful (about a 90% success rate). You should be invited for a follow-up cervical screening test to check that the treatment has been successful.  Read more about colposcopy treatments. Try not to worry If you're referred for a colposcopy after an abnormal cervical screening test, you shouldn't assume you have cervical cancer. Less than 1 in 1,000 women referred for a colposcopy are found to have cervical cancer that requires immediate treatment. Cervical cancer screening is successful because cell changes can occur many years before cancer can develop. Identifying and treating these cell changes at an early stage can prevent cancer from ever developing. Page last reviewed: 15\/12\/2014 Next review due: 15\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 413 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 265  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cervical cancer Cervical screening Vaginal cancer External links BSCCP: information for women Cancer Research UK: treatment for abnormal cervical cells Jo's Trust: going for a colposcopy Cervical screening Cervical screening is a way of detecting abnormal cells on a woman's cervix (the entrance to the womb from the vagina) NHS cancer screening There are some types of cancers you can get free routine screening for Find and choose services for Colposcopy Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/coma","content":"Coma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview coma Clinical trials Coma Introduction  A coma is a state of unconsciousness where a person is unresponsive and cannot be woken. It can result from injury to the brain, such as a severe head injury or stroke. A coma can also be caused by severe alcohol poisoning or a brain infection (encephalitis).  People with diabetes could fall into a coma if their blood glucose levels suddenly became very low (hypoglycaemia) or very high (hyperglycaemia).  You may find the following information useful if you have a friend or loved one who is in a coma. It covers: What is a coma?  Caring for and monitoring a person in a coma  What you can do as a visitor  Recovering from a coma  Support and more information  What is a coma? Someone who is in a coma is unconscious and has minimal brain activity. They're alive, but can't be woken up and show no signs of being aware. The person's eyes will be closed and they'll appear to be unresponsive to their environment. They won't normally respond to sound or pain, or be able to communicate or move voluntarily. Someone in a coma will also have very reduced basic reflexes such as coughing and swallowing. They may be able to breathe on their own, although some people require a machine to help them breathe. Over time, the person may start to gradually regain consciousness and become more aware. Some people will wake up after a few weeks, while others may go into a vegetative state or minimally conscious state (see recovering from a coma, below). Caring for and monitoring a person in a coma Doctors assess a person's level of consciousness using a tool called the Glasgow Coma Scale. This level is monitored constantly for signs of improvement or deterioration. The Glasgow Coma Scale assesses three things: eye opening \u2013 a score of one means no eye opening, and four means opens eyes spontaneously verbal response to a command \u2013 a score of one means no response, and five means alert and talking voluntary movements in response to a command \u2013 a score of one means no response, and six means obeys commands Most people in a coma will have a total score of eight or less. A lower score means someone may have experienced more severe brain damage and could be less likely to recover. In the short term, a person in a coma will normally be looked after in an intensive care unit (ICU). Treatment involves ensuring their condition is stable and their body functions, such as breathing and blood pressure, are supported while the underlying cause is treated. In the longer term, healthcare staff will give supportive treatment on a hospital ward. This can involve providing nutrition, trying to prevent infections, moving the person regularly so they don't develop bedsores, and gently exercising their joints to stop them becoming tight. What you can do as a visitor The experience of being in a coma differs from person to person. Some people feel they can remember events that happened around them while they were in a coma, while others don't. Some people have reported feeling enormous reassurance from the presence of a loved one when coming out of a coma. When visiting a friend or loved one in a coma, you may find the advice below helpful: when you arrive, announce who you are talk to them about your day as you normally would \u2013 be aware that everything you say in front of them might be heard show them your love and support \u2013 even just sitting and holding their hand or stroking their skin can be a great comfort Research has also suggested that stimulating the main senses \u2013 touch, hearing, vision and smell \u2013 could potentially help a person recover from a coma. As well as talking to the person and holding their hand, you might want to try playing them their favourite music through headphones, putting flowers in their room or spraying a favourite perfume. Recovering from a coma A coma usually only lasts a few weeks, during which time the person may start to gradually wake up and gain consciousness, or progress into a different state of unconsciousness called a vegetative state or minimally conscious state. a vegetative state \u2013 where a person is awake but shows no signs of being aware of their surroundings or themselves a minimally conscious state \u2013 where a person has limited awareness that comes and goes Some people may recover from these states gradually, while others may not improve for years, if at all. See the page on disorders of consciousness for more information about these conditions. People who do wake up from a coma usually come round gradually. They may be very agitated and confused to begin with. Some people will make a full recovery and be completely unaffected by the coma. Others will have disabilities caused by the damage to their brain. They may need physiotherapy, occupational therapy and psychological assessment and support during a period of rehabilitation, and may need care for the rest of their lives. The chances of someone recovering from a coma largely depend on the severity and cause of their brain injury, their age and how long they've been in a coma. But it's impossible to accurately predict whether the person will eventually recover, how long the coma will last and whether they'll have any long-term problems. Further information and support For further information and support from healthcare professionals and the families of people in a coma, you may find the following websites helpful: Brain and Spine Foundation Headway: the brain injury association ICUsteps: the intensive care patient support charity Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 18\/06\/2015 Next review due: 18\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 199 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Disorders of consciousness Severe head injury External links Brain and Spine Foundation: severe head injuries Headway: coma ICUsteps: patients and relatives Disorders of consciousness Read more about impaired consciousness after brain injury, including comas, vegetative states and minimally conscious states NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Combined contraceptive pill","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/combined-contraceptive-pill.aspx","content":"The combined pill - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Combined pill The combined oral contraceptive pill is usually just called \"the pill\". It contains artificial versions of the female hormones oestrogen and progesterone, which women produce naturally in their ovaries. At a glance: the combined pill   How the combined pill works   What to do if you miss a pill   Who can use the combined pill   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks of the combined pill A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the combined pill. The hormones in the pill prevent your ovaries from releasing an egg (ovulating). They also make it difficult for sperm to reach an egg, or for an egg to implant itself in the lining of the womb. The pill is usually taken to prevent pregnancy, but can also be used to treat painful periods, heavy periods, premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and endometriosis. At a glance: the combined pill When taken correctly, the pill is over 99% effective at preventing pregnancy. This means that fewer than one woman in 100 who use the combined pill as contraception will get pregnant in one year. You need to take the pill every day for 21 days, then stop for seven days, and during this week you have a period-type bleed. You start taking the pill again after seven days. You need to take the pill at the same time every day. You could get pregnant if you don't do this, or if you miss a pill, or vomit or have severe diarrhoea. If you have heavy periods or painful periods, the combined pill can help. Minor side effects include mood swings, breast tenderness and headaches. There is no evidence that the pill makes women gain weight. There's a very low risk of serious side effects, such as blood clots and cervical cancer. The combined pill is not suitable for women over 35 who smoke, or women with certain medical conditions. The pill does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs), so using a condom as well will help to protect you against STIs. How the combined pill works How it prevents pregnancy Monophasic 21-day pills Phasic 21-day pills Every day (ED) pills How to take 21-day pills How to take every day pills Starting the combined pill Taking pill packs back-to-back How it prevents pregnancy The pill prevents the ovaries from releasing an egg each month (ovulation). It also: thickens the mucus in the neck of the womb, so it is harder for sperm to penetrate the womb and reach an egg thins the lining of the womb, so there is less chance of a fertilised egg implanting into the womb and being able to grow Although there are many different brands of pill, there are three main types: Monophasic 21-day pills This is the most common type. Each pill has the same amount of hormone in it. One pill is taken each day for 21 days and then no pills are taken for the next seven days. Microgynon, Brevinor and Cilest are examples of this type of pill. Phasic 21-day pills Phasic pills contain two or three sections of different coloured pills in a pack. Each section contains a different amount of hormones. One pill is taken each day for 21 days and then no pills are taken for the next seven days. Phasic pills need to be taken in the right order. Binovum and Logynon are examples of this type of pill. Every day (ED) pills You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you There are 21 active pills and seven inactive (dummy) pills in a pack. The two types of pill look different. One pill is taken each day for 28 days with no break between packets of pills. Every day pills need to be taken in the right order. Microgynon ED and Logynon ED are examples of this type of pill. Follow the instructions that come with your packet. If you have any questions about how to take the pill, ask your GP, practice nurse or pharmacist. It's important to take the pills as instructed, because missing pills or taking them at the same time as certain medicines may make them less effective. How to take 21-day pills Take your first pill from the packet marked with the correct day of the week, or the first pill of the first colour (phasic pills). Continue to take a pill at the same time each day until the pack is finished.  Stop taking pills for seven days (during these seven days you will get a bleed).  Start your next pack of pills on the eighth day, whether you are still bleeding or not. This should be the same day of the week as when you took your first pill. How to take every day pills Take the first pill from the section of the packet marked \"start\". This will be an active pill. Continue to take a pill every day, in the correct order and preferably at the same time each day, until the pack is finished (28 days).  During the seven days of taking the inactive pills, you will get a bleed. Start your next pack of pills after you have finished the first, whether you are still bleeding or not. Starting the combined pill Most women can start the pill at any time in their menstrual cycle. There is special guidance if you have just had a baby, abortion or miscarriage. You may need to use additional contraception during your first days on the pill \u2013 this depends on when in your menstrual cycle you start taking it. If you start the combined pill on the first day of your period (day one of your menstrual cycle) you will be protected from pregnancy straight away. You will not need additional contraception. If you start the pill on the fifth day of your period or before, you will still be protected from pregnancy straight away, unless you have a short menstrual cycle (your period is every 23 days or less). If you have a short menstrual cycle, you will need additional contraception, such as condoms, until you have taken the pill for seven days. If you start the pill on any other day of your cycle, you will not be protected from pregnancy straight away and will need additional contraception until you have taken the pill for seven days. Taking pill packs back-to-back For monophasic combined pills (pills all the same colour and with the same level of hormones), it is normally fine to start a new pack of pills straight after your last one \u2013 for example, if you want to delay your period for a holiday. However, avoid taking more than two packs together unless advised to by a doctor or nurse. This is because you may have breakthrough bleeding as the womb lining sheds slightly. Some women find they feel bloated if they run several packs of the pill together. What to do if you miss a pill If you miss a pill or pills, or you start a pack late, this can make the pill less effective at preventing pregnancy. The chance of getting pregnant after missing a pill or pills depends on: when the pills are missed how many pills are missed A pill is late when you have forgotten to take it at your usual time. You have missed a pill when it is more than 24 hours since the time you should have taken it. Missing one pill anywhere in your pack or starting the new pack one day late isn\u2019t a problem, as you will still be protected against pregnancy (known as having contraceptive cover). However, missing two or more pills, or starting the pack two or more days late (more than 48 hours late) may affect your contraceptive cover. In particular, if you make the seven-day pill-free break longer by forgetting two or more pills, your ovaries might release an egg and there is a risk of getting pregnant. This is because your ovaries are not getting any effect from the pill during the seven-day break. If you miss a pill, follow the advice below. If you are not sure what to do, continue to take your pill and use another method of contraception, such as condoms, and seek advice as soon as possible. If you have missed one pill, anywhere in the pack: take the last pill you missed now, even if it means taking two pills in one day continue taking the rest of the pack as usual you don\u2019t need to use additional contraception, such as condoms take your seven-day pill-free break as normal If you have missed two or more pills (you are taking your pill more than 48 hours late) anywhere in the pack: take the last pill you missed now, even if it means taking two pills in one day leave any earlier missed pills continue taking the rest of the pack as usual and use an extra method of contraception for the next seven days you may need emergency contraception you may need to start the next pack of pills without a break (see Starting the next pack after missing two or more pills) You may need emergency contraception if you have had unprotected sex in the previous seven days and have missed two or more pills (you are taking your pill more than 48 hours late) in the first week of a pack. Get advice from your contraception clinic, doctor or pharmacist about this. You can also call NHS 111 or the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123. Starting the next pack after missing two or more pills If there are seven or more pills left in the pack after the last missed pill: finish the pack have the usual seven-day break If there are fewer than seven pills left in the pack after the last missed pill:  finish the pack and start the new one the next day, without having a break Vomiting and diarrhoea If you vomit within two hours of taking the combined pill, it may not have been fully absorbed into your bloodstream. Take another pill straight away and the next pill at your usual time. If you continue to be sick, keep using another form of contraception while you're ill and for two days after recovering. Very severe diarrhoea (six to eight watery stools in 24 hours) may also mean that the pill doesn't work properly. Keep taking your pill as normal, but use additional contraception, such as condoms, while you have diarrhoea and for two days after recovering. Speak to your GP or contraception nurse or call NHS 111 for more information, or if your sickness or diarrhoea continues. Who can use the combined pill If there are no medical reasons why you cannot take the pill and you do not smoke, you can take the pill until your menopause. However, the pill is not suitable for all women. To find out whether the pill is right for you, talk to your GP, practice nurse or pharmacist. You should not take the pill if you: are pregnant smoke and are 35 or older stopped smoking less than a year ago and are 35 or older are very overweight take certain medicines (ask your GP about this) You should also not take the pill if you have (or have had): thrombosis (a blood clot) a heart abnormality or heart disease, including high blood pressure severe migraines, especially with aura (warning symptoms) breast cancer disease of the gallbladder or liver diabetes with complications or diabetes for the past 20 years After having a baby If you have just had a baby and are not breastfeeding, you can start the pill on day 21 after the birth. You will be protected against pregnancy straight away. If you start the pill later than 21 days after giving birth, you will need additional contraception (such as condoms) for the next seven days. If you are breastfeeding a baby less than six months old, taking the pill can reduce your flow of milk. It is recommended that you use a different method of contraception until you stop breastfeeding. After a miscarriage or abortion If you have had a miscarriage or abortion, you can start the pill up to five days after this and you will be protected from pregnancy straight away. If you start the pill more than five days after the miscarriage or abortion, you'll need to use additional contraception until you have taken the pill for seven days. Advantages and disadvantages Some advantages of the pill include: it does not interrupt sex it usually makes your bleeds regular, lighter and less painful it reduces your risk of cancer of the ovaries, womb and colon it can reduce symptoms of PMS it can sometimes reduce acne it may protect against pelvic inflammatory disease it may reduce the risk of fibroids, ovarian cysts and non-cancerous breast disease Some disadvantages of the pill include: it can cause temporary side effects at first, such as headaches, nausea, breast tenderness and mood swings \u2013 if these do not go after a few months, it may help to change to a different pill it can increase your blood pressure it does not protect you against sexually transmitted infections breakthrough bleeding and spotting is common in the first few months of using the pill it has been linked to an increased risk of some serious health conditions, such as thrombosis (blood clots) and breast cancer The combined pill with other medicines Some medicines interact with the combined pill and it doesn't work properly. Some interactions are listed on this page, but it is not a complete list. If you want to check your medicines are safe to take with the combined pill, you can: ask your GP, practice nurse or pharmacist read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine Antibiotics The antibiotics rifampicin and rifabutin (which can be used to treat illnesses including tuberculosis and meningitis) can reduce the effectiveness of the combined pill. Other antibiotics do not have this effect. If you are prescribed rifampicin or rifabutin, you may need additional contraception (such as condoms) while taking the antibiotic. Speak to your doctor or nurse for advice. Epilepsy and HIV medicines, and St John's wort The combined pill can interact with medicines called enzyme inducers. These speed up the breakdown of progestogen by your liver, reducing the effectiveness of the pill. Examples of enzyme inducers are: the epilepsy drugs carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone and topiramate St John's wort (a herbal remedy) antiretroviral medicines used to treat HIV (research suggests that interactions between these medicines and the progestogen-only pill can affect the safety and effectiveness of both) Your GP or nurse may advise you to use an alternative or additional form of contraception while taking any of these medicines. Risks of taking the combined pill There are some risks associated with using the combined contraceptive pill. However, these risks are small and, for most women, the benefits of the pill outweigh the risks. Blood clots The oestrogen in the pill may cause your blood to clot more readily. If a blood clot develops, it could cause deep vein thrombosis (clot in your leg), pulmonary embolus (clot in your lung), stroke or heart attack. The risk of getting a blood clot is very small, but your doctor will check if you have certain risk factors that make you more vulnerable before prescribing the pill. The pill can be taken with caution if you have one of the risk factors below, but you should not take it if you have two or more risk factors. These include: being 35 years old or over being a smoker or having quit smoking in the past year being very overweight (in women with a BMI of 35 or over, the risks of using the pill usually outweigh the benefits) having migraines (you should not take the pill if you have severe or regular migraine attacks, especially if you get aura or a warning sign before an attack) having high blood pressure having had a blood clot or stroke in the past having a close relative who had a blood clot when they were younger than 45 being immobile for a long time \u2013 for example, in a wheelchair or with a leg in plaster Cancer Research is ongoing into the link between breast cancer and the pill. Research suggests that users of all types of hormonal contraception have a slightly higher chance of being diagnosed with breast cancer compared with women who do not use them. However, 10 years after you stop taking the pill, your risk of breast cancer goes back to normal. Research has also suggested a link between the pill and the risk of developing cervical cancer and a rare form of liver cancer. However, the pill does offer some protection against developing endometrium (lining of the womb) cancer, ovarian cancer and colon cancer. Where you can get the combined pill Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people's services (call the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching by postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.   Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/12\/2014 Next review due: 29\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 538 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 372  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Which method suits me?  What should I do if I miss a pill? Where can I get contraception? External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information FPA: My Contraception Tool Will they tell my parents? Confidentiality and sexual health services for young people, including contraception, STIs and abortion services Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Taken an extra pill What to do if you've taken an extra contraceptive pill by accident Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens Progestogen-only pill The progestogen-only pill uses fewer hormones than the combined pill, which can be key for women who can't use oestrogen NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Contraception","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/contraception-guide","content":"Contraception - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Your contraception guide Welcome to the contraception guide \"Where can I get contraception?\" \"Which method of contraception suits me?\" \"I'm under 16 \u2013 can I get contraception?\" Whatever questions you have about getting and using contraception, this guide can help. It aims to give practical information to everyone who wants to know more about contraception, including teenagers; women in their 20s, 30s and 40s; and anyone with a question about the method they use or are thinking about using. You can find out about the 15 methods that are available on the NHS, together with where to get them and how to decide which method might work best for you. Finding your way around If you're viewing on a computer screen, use the big green tabs at the top of the page to see a full menu for each section of the contraception guide. If you can't find what you are after, try the search box at the top of the page \u2013 it covers everything on the NHS Choices site. If you're viewing this on a mobile device, click the blue tab called \"Sections\" at the top of the page, and you'll see a list of all the topics covered in this guide. When you are on a page you like, be sure to check out the useful links and videos on the right-hand side. Popular subjects and pages You can start by finding out about the methods of contraception you can choose from, including how they work, who can use them and possible side effects. These methods are:  caps combined pill condoms (female) condoms (male) contraceptive implant contraceptive injection contraceptive patch diaphragms intrauterine device (IUD) intrauterine system (IUS) natural family planning progestogen-only pill vaginal ring There are two permanent methods of contraception: female sterilisation male sterilisation (vasectomy) You can also find out about: how effective contraception is, and how effective emergency contraception is Deciding which method suits you Which method works best for you depends on a number of factors, including your age, whether you smoke, your medical and family history, and any medication you're taking. Find out what you need to think about in Which method suits me? Where you can get contraception and emergency contraception Contraception is free on the NHS. Find out where to get contraception, and search by postcode to find: GPs near you  sexual health clinics near you  pharmacies near you  You can also find out where to get emergency contraception \u2013 the \"morning after pill\" or the IUD (coil). Common questions about contraception Get answers to some common questions about getting and using contraception, including: what to do if you're on the pill and you're sick or have diarrhoea using contraception after having a baby when your periods will come back after stopping the pill whether you can get a sterilisation reversal on the NHS Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2015 Next review due: 02\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 286 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 160  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Hospital Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Contraception clinics Find out what information and services you can expect from a contraception clinic External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for under 25s NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Community acquired pneumonia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pneumonia","content":"Pneumonia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pneumonia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pneumonia Clinical trials Pneumonia Community Pneumonia Pneumonia Treatment   Pneumonia is swelling (inflammation) of the tissue in one or both lungs. It's usually caused by a bacterial infection. At the end of the breathing tubes in your lungs are clusters of tiny air sacs. If you have pneumonia, these tiny sacs become inflamed and fill up with fluid. Symptoms of pneumonia The symptoms of pneumonia can develop suddenly over 24 to 48 hours, or they may come on more slowly over several days. Common symptoms of pneumonia include: a cough \u2013 which may be dry, or produce thick yellow, green, brown or blood-stained mucus (phlegm) difficulty breathing \u2013 your breathing may be rapid and shallow, and you may feel breathless, even when resting rapid heartbeat fever feeling generally unwell sweating and shivering loss of appetite chest pain \u2013 which gets worse when breathing or coughing Less common symptoms include: coughing up blood (haemoptysis) headaches fatigue nausea or vomiting wheezing joint and muscle pain feeling confused and disorientated, particularly in elderly people When to see your GP See your GP if you feel unwell and you have typical symptoms of pneumonia. Seek urgent medical attention if you're experiencing severe symptoms, such as rapid breathing, chest pain or confusion. Who's affected? In the UK, pneumonia affects around 8 in 1,000 adults each year. It's more widespread in autumn and winter. Pneumonia can affect people of any age, but it's more common \u2013 and can be more serious \u2013 in certain groups of people, such as the very young or the elderly. People in these groups are more likely to need hospital treatment if they develop pneumonia. What causes pneumonia? Pneumonia is usually the result of a pneumococcal infection, caused by bacteria called Streptococcus pneumoniae. Many different types of bacteria, including Haemophilus influenzae and Staphylococcus aureus, can also cause pneumonia, as well as viruses and, more rarely, fungi. As well as bacterial pneumonia, other types include: viral pneumonia \u2013 most commonly caused by the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and sometimes influenza type A or B; viruses are a common cause of pneumonia in young children aspiration pneumonia \u2013 caused by breathing in vomit, a foreign object, such as a peanut, or a harmful substance, such as smoke or a chemical fungal pneumonia \u2013 rare in the UK and more likely to affect people with a weakened immune system hospital-acquired pneumonia \u2013 pneumonia that develops in hospital while being treated for another condition or having an operation; people in intensive care on breathing machines are particularly at risk of developing ventilator-associated pneumonia Risk groups The following groups have an increased risk of developing pneumonia: babies and very young children elderly people people who smoke people with other health conditions, such as asthma, cystic fibrosis, or a heart, kidney or liver condition people with a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, as a result of a recent illness, such as flu, having HIV or AIDS, having chemotherapy, or taking medication following an organ transplant Diagnosing pneumonia Your GP may be able to diagnose pneumonia by asking about your symptoms and examining your chest. Further tests may be needed in some cases. Pneumonia can be difficult to diagnose because it shares many symptoms with other conditions, such as the common cold, bronchitis and asthma. To help make a diagnosis, your GP may ask you: whether you feel breathless or you're breathing faster than usual how long you've had your cough, and whether you're coughing up mucus and what colour it is if the pain in your chest is worse when you breathe in or out Your GP may also take your temperature and listen to your chest and back with a stethoscope to check for any crackling or rattling sounds. They may also listen to your chest by tapping it. Lungs filled with fluid produce a different sound from normal healthy lungs. If you have mild pneumonia, you probably won't need to have a chest X-ray or any other tests. You may need a chest X-ray or other tests, such as a sputum (mucus) test or blood tests, if your symptoms haven't improved within 48 hours of starting treatment. Treating pneumonia Mild pneumonia can usually be treated at home by: getting plenty of rest taking antibiotics drinking plenty of fluids If you don't have any other health problems, you should respond well to treatment and soon recover, although your cough may last for some time. As pneumonia isn't usually passed from one person to another, it's safe to be around others, including family members. However, people with a weakened immune system should avoid close contact with a person with pneumonia until they start to get better. For at-risk groups, pneumonia can be severe and may need to be treated in hospital. This is because it can lead to serious complications, which in some cases can be fatal, depending on a person's health and age. Read more about treating pneumonia. Complications of pneumonia Complications of pneumonia are more common in young children, the elderly and those with pre-existing health conditions, such as diabetes. Possible complications of pneumonia include: pleurisy \u2013 where the thin linings between your lungs and ribcage (pleura) become inflamed, which can lead to respiratory failure a lung abscess \u2013 a rare complication that's mostly seen in people with a serious pre-existing illness or a history of severe alcohol misuse blood poisoning (septicaemia) \u2013 also a rare but serious complication You'll be admitted to hospital for treatment if you develop one of these complications. Preventing pneumonia Although most cases of pneumonia are bacterial and aren't passed on from one person to another, ensuring good standards of hygiene will help prevent germs spreading. For example, you should: cover your mouth and nose with a handkerchief or tissue when you cough or sneeze  throw away used tissues immediately \u2013 germs can live for several hours after they leave your nose or mouth wash your hands regularly to avoid transferring germs to other people or objects A healthy lifestyle can also help prevent pneumonia. For example, you should avoid smoking as it damages your lungs and increases the chance of infection. Find out how to stop smoking. Excessive and prolonged alcohol misuse also weakens your lungs' natural defences against infections, making you more vulnerable to pneumonia. People at high risk of pneumonia should be offered the pneumococcal vaccine and flu vaccine. Page last reviewed: 11\/05\/2016 Next review due: 11\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1419 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 699  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 405  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 167  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Pneumococcal disease Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Professor Brian Duerden, CBE, explains how pneumococcal disease can cause pneumonia and other invasive infections. He describes the effects of the disease on older people and children, and what you can do to prevent it. Media last reviewed: 23\/04\/2015 Next review due: 23\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Chest infection Pleurisy Pneumococcal infections Shortness of breath Stop smoking External links British Lung Foundation NHS Smokefree National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): diagnosis and management of pneumonia in adults Pneumococcal infections Pneumococcal infections are caused by the S. pneumoniae bacterium. Find out who's at risk and which vaccinations are available Pneumococcal vaccine The pneumococcal vaccination, also known as the pneumo jab, protects against pneumococcal infections Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Pneumonia Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Compartment syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/compartment-syndrome","content":"Compartment syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Compartment syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Compartment syndrome Introduction  Compartment syndrome is a painful and potentially serious condition caused by bleeding or swelling within an enclosed bundle of muscles (a muscle 'compartment'). What are 'compartments'? Each group of muscles in the arms and legs, together with the nearby blood vessels and nerves, is contained in an enclosed space surrounded by layers of tissue called fascia. Compartment syndrome occurs when pressure within a compartment increases and affects the function of the muscle and tissues. What are the symptoms of compartment syndrome? The symptoms depend on whether you have acute compartment syndrome \u2013 which happens suddenly, after injury \u2013 or chronic compartment syndrome, which comes on gradually. Acute compartment syndrome  Acute compartment syndrome causes intense pain, especially when the affected muscle is stretched. You may also have a tingling or burning feeling in the skin, and the muscle may feel tight. It is a medical emergency because the high pressure inside the compartment can potentially cause permanent muscle and nerve damage. Acute compartment syndrome usually happens after a fracture or a crush injury but can also be caused by severe bruising of a muscle. In rare cases it can occur without an injury. Other possible causes include: having a plaster cast or tight bandage applied to a limb while the swelling is still happening \u2013 the cast or bandage becomes the 'compartment' having surgery to repair a damaged or blocked blood vessel, usually after someone has been unconscious for a long time \u2013 once blood can flow back into a muscle it could lead to swelling burns Acute compartment syndrome will be diagnosed and treated by hospital doctors, usually when you are in the hospital emergency department after an accident. Diagnosis is usually based on the symptoms and signs of the condition. However, if you are at high risk of compartment syndrome, or unconscious when you are brought into hospital, a pressure monitoring device may be attached to your affected limbs using needles. Chronic compartment syndrome Chronic compartment syndrome causes cramping pain during exercise, mostly in the leg, that eases when the activity is stopped. You may also have difficulty moving the foot and visible muscle bulging. It is much less serious than acute compartment syndrome. It comes on gradually, usually after a long period of repetitive-motion exercise, such as running or cycling. Chronic compartment syndrome will probably be diagnosed by your GP \u2013 a diagnosis is made when other causes of muscle pain, such as tendonitis, have been ruled out. What is happening? The above symptoms happen because the swelling or bleeding increases the pressure inside the compartment. When this pressure exceeds the pressure inside the veins, blood cannot flow properly. Oxygen and nutrients cannot get to the muscles and nerves, leading to tissue damage. If you go on to develop numbness or paralysis, it usually means there is permanent tissue damage. Which muscles are affected?  Compartment syndrome usually occurs in the legs, feet, arms or hands, but it can occur wherever there is an enclosed compartment inside the body. The abdomen (tummy) and buttocks are less commonly affected. When the abdomen is affected, this may cause kidney failure or heart problems. If it happens in the buttocks it can result in damage to the sciatic nerve (which runs down your lower back and legs) and disability. How is it treated? Acute compartment syndrome Acute compartment syndrome must be treated in hospital using a surgical procedure called an emergency fasciotomy. The doctor will make an incision to cut open your skin and fascia surrounding the muscles, to immediately relieve the pressure inside the muscle compartment and prevent permanent tissue damage. The wound will be closed 48-72 hours later. Occasionally, a skin graft may be required. Chronic compartment syndrome Chronic compartment syndrome is usually not dangerous and can sometimes just be relieved by stopping the exercise and choosing low-impact activities instead. Physiotherapy, shoe inserts and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines may help \u2013 speak to your GP about this. Surgery (see above) will only be considered if your symptoms persist despite the above measures \u2013 in which case you will go on a waiting list, as chronic compartment syndrome is not a medical emergency. Increased pressure within a group of muscles causes a decrease in blood supply to the affected muscles  Acute vs chronic compartment syndrome Acute syndrome: a medical emergency happens suddenly, usually after a fracture or severe soft tissue injury will need to be urgently diagnosed and treated to prevent permanent muscle damage Chronic syndrome: not a medical emergency happens gradually, usually after repetitive-motion exercise (for example, running or cycling) pain is felt during exercise but eases when the activity is stopped  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2014 Next review due: 02\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 153 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Broken arm Broken leg Physiotherapy Sports injuries How do I apply a bandage? External links Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: find a physio Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you How to stretch after exercising How to stretch and cool down after a workout to warm down gradually, improve flexibility and slow your heart rate NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Complex regional pain syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome","content":"Complex regional pain syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Complex regional pain syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Clinical trials Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Community Complex regional pain syndrome Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Symptoms Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Causes Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Diagnosis Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Treatment   Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a poorly understood condition in which a person experiences persistent severe and debilitating pain. Although most cases of CRPS are triggered by an injury, the resulting pain is much more severe and long-lasting than normal. The pain is usually confined to one limb, but it can sometimes spread to other parts of the body. The skin of the affected body part can become so sensitive that just a slight touch, bump or even a change in temperature can provoke intense pain. Affected areas can also become swollen, stiff or undergo fluctuating changes in colour or temperature. Many cases of CRPS gradually improve to some degree over time, or get completely better. However, some cases of CRPS never go away, and the affected person will experience pain for many years. Read more about the symptoms of CRPS. When to seek medical advice You should see your GP if you have persistent pain that's preventing you from carrying out everyday activities. CRPS can be difficult to diagnose because it involves a number of tests to rule out other possible causes. It's best to seek help as soon as possible, because early treatment may reduce unnecessary suffering. Read more about diagnosing CRPS. Causes of CRPS The cause of CRPS is unknown, but it's generally thought to be the result of the body reacting abnormally to an injury. It used to be thought that CRPS was a psychosomatic condition (the symptoms were \"all in the mind\") but research has disproved this. Read more about the possible causes of CRPS. Who is affected? It's difficult to estimate exactly how common CRPS is, as many cases may go undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. A study claimed that up to 1 in 3,800 people in the UK develop CRPS each year. CRPS can begin at any age, including in children, although the average age for symptoms to start is around 50. Women make up around 3 out of 4 cases. Treating CRPS Treatment for CRPS involves four main aspects: education and self-management \u2013 being given clear information about your condition and advice on any steps you can take to help manage your condition yourself physical rehabilitation \u2013 treatment to help manage your symptoms and reduce the risk of long-term physical problems, such as physiotherapy exercises pain relief \u2013 treatments to help reduce your pain, such as anticonvulsants or antidepressants psychological support \u2013 interventions to help you cope with the emotional impact of living with CRPS, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Due to the complex nature of CRPS, a number of different professionals will usually be involved in your care. Read more about treating CRPS. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 288 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with pain Physiotherapy Occupational therapy NSAIDs External links Action on Pain: chronic pain Arthritis Research UK: CRPS The British Pain Society healthtalk.org: chronic pain Pain Concern Burning Nights: Complex regional pain syndrome Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain How to get NHS help for long-term pain Find out how to get help from your GP or local hospital if you have persistent pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Computerised tomography","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/CT-Scan","content":"CT scan - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories CT scan  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview CT-scan Clinical trials CT scan Introduction  A computerised tomography (CT) scan uses X-rays and a computer to create detailed images of the inside of the body.  CT scans are sometimes referred to as CAT scans or computed tomography scans. They're carried out in hospital by specially trained operators called radiographers and can be done while you're staying in hospital or during a short visit. When CT scans are used CT scans can produce detailed images of many structures inside the body, including the internal organs, blood vessels and bones. They can be used to: diagnose conditions \u2013 including damage to bones, injuries to internal organs, problems with blood flow, strokes and cancer guide further tests or treatments \u2013 for example, CT scans can help to determine the location, size and shape of a tumour before having radiotherapy, or allow a doctor to take a needle biopsy (where a small tissue sample is removed using a needle) or drain an abscess monitor conditions \u2013 including checking the size of tumours during and after cancer treatment CT scans wouldn't normally be used to check for problems if you don't have any symptoms (known as screening). This is because the benefits of screening may not outweigh the risks, particularly if it leads to unnecessary testing and anxiety.  Preparing for a CT scan Your appointment letter will mention anything you need to do to prepare for your scan. You may be advised to avoid eating anything for several hours before your appointment, to help ensure that clear images are taken. You should contact the hospital after receiving your appointment letter if you have any allergies or kidney problems, or if you're taking medication for diabetes, because special arrangements may need to be made. You should also let the hospital know if you're pregnant. CT scans aren't usually recommended for pregnant women unless it's an emergency, as there's a small chance the X-rays could harm your baby. It's a good idea to wear loose comfortable clothes, as you may be able to wear these during the scan. Try to avoid wearing jewellery and clothes containing metal (such as zips), as these will need to be removed. Before having a CT scan Before having the scan, you may be given a special dye called a contrast to help improve the quality of the images. This may be swallowed in the form of a drink, passed into your bottom (enema), or injected into a blood vessel. Tell the radiographer if you feel anxious or claustrophobic about having the scan. They can give you advice to help you feel calm and can arrange for you to have a sedative (medication to help you relax) if necessary. Before the scan starts, you may be asked to remove your clothing and put on a gown. You'll also be asked to remove anything metal, such as jewellery, as metal interferes with the scanning equipment. What happens during a CT scan During the scan, you'll usually lie on your back on a flat bed that passes into the CT scanner. The scanner consists of a ring that rotates around a small section of your body as you pass through it. Unlike a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, the scanner doesn't surround your whole body at once, so you shouldn't feel claustrophobic. The radiographer will operate the scanner from the next room. While the scan is taking place, you'll be able to hear and speak to them through an intercom. While each scan is taken, you'll need to lie very still and breathe normally. This ensures that the scan images aren't blurred. You may be asked to breathe in, breathe out, or hold your breath at certain points. The scan will usually take around 10-20 minutes.  What happens afterwards You shouldn't experience any after effects from a CT scan and can usually go home soon afterwards. You can eat and drink, go to work and drive as normal. If a contrast was used, you may be advised to wait in the hospital for up to an hour to make sure you don't have a reaction to it (see below). The contrast is normally completely harmless and will pass out of your body in your urine. Your scan results won't usually be available immediately. A computer will need to process the information from your scan, which will then be analysed by a radiologist (a specialist in interpreting images of the body). After analysing the images, the radiologist will write a report and send it to the doctor who referred you for the scan, so they can discuss the results with you. This normally takes a few days or weeks. Are CT scans safe? CT scans are quick, painless and generally safe. However, there's a small risk you could have an allergic reaction to the contrast dye used and you will be exposed to X-ray radiation. The amount of radiation you're exposed to during a CT scan varies, depending on how much of your body is scanned. CT scanners are designed to make sure you're not exposed to unnecessarily high levels. Generally, the amount of radiation you're exposed to during each scan is the equivalent to between a few months and a few years of exposure to natural radiation from the environment. It's thought exposure to radiation during CT scans could slightly increase your chances of developing cancer many years later, although this risk is thought to be very small (less than 1 in 2,000). For more information, read GOV.UK: patient dose information. The benefits and risks of having a CT scan will always be weighed up before it's recommended. Talk to your doctor or radiographer about the potential risks beforehand, if you have any concerns. Page last reviewed: 24\/07\/2015 Next review due: 24\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2161 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 512  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 313  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links MRI scan PET scan Ultrasound scan X-ray External links Brain & Spine Foundation: CT scans Cancer Research UK: CT scan Easy health: CT scanleaflets Yellow Card Scheme X-ray An X-ray is a common procedure used to produce images of the inside of the body MRI scan An MRI scan uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to produce detailed images of the inside of the body NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Concussion","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Concussion","content":"Concussion - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Concussion  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Concussion Concussion Symptoms Concussion Causes Concussion Diagnosis Concussion Treatment Concussion Complications Concussion Prevention Introduction  Concussion is the sudden but short-lived loss of mental function that occurs after a blow or other injury to the head. It is the most common but least serious type of brain injury. The medical term for concussion is minor traumatic brain injury. Symptoms of concussion include brief: loss of consciousness after the head injury periods of memory loss disturbances in vision, such as \"seeing stars\" or blurry vision a period of confusion, a blank expression, or a delay in answering questions immediately after the head injury If a brain scan is carried out, concussion is only diagnosed if the scan is normal \u2013 for example, there is no bleeding or swelling of the brain. When to seek medical help Concussion should only be diagnosed by a health professional trained in assessing patients with head injury. They will be able to rule out serious brain injury that needs a brain scan or surgery. You should visit your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if you or someone in your care has a head injury and develops the following signs and symptoms: loss of consciousness, however brief memory loss, such as not being able to remember what happened before or after the injury persistent headaches since the injury changes in behaviour, such as irritability, being easily distracted or having no interest in the outside world \u2013 this is a particularly common sign in children under five confusion drowsiness that occurs when you would normally be awake loss of balance or problems walking difficulties with understanding what people say difficulty speaking, such as slurred speech problems with reading or writing vomiting since the injury problems with vision, such as double vision loss of power in part of the body, such as weakness in an arm or leg clear fluid leaving the nose or ears (this could be cerebrospinal fluid, which surrounds the brain) sudden deafness in one or both ears any wound to the head or face Anyone drunk or high on recreational drugs should go to A&E if they have a head injury as it's easy for others around them to miss the signs of a more severe injury. Phone 999 for an ambulance immediately if the person: remains unconscious after the initial injury is having a seizure or fit is bleeding from one or both ears has been vomiting since the injury is having difficulty staying awake, speaking, or understanding what people are saying Certain things make you more vulnerable to the effects of a head injury. These include: being aged 65 or older having previously had brain surgery having a condition that makes you bleed more easily, such as haemophilia having a condition that makes your blood more prone to clotting, such as thrombophilia taking anticoagulant medication, such as warfarin or aspirin, to prevent blood clots There are things you can do at home to help relieve concussion symptoms, including: apply a cold compress to the injury to reduce swelling \u2013 a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a towel will do take paracetamol to control any pain \u2013 do not use non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen or aspirin, as these can cause bleeding avoid drinking alcohol or taking recreational drugs Read more about how concussion is treated, including information on self care tips and when you can return to playing sport. Recovery After experiencing concussion, careful monitoring is needed. This is usually for 48 hours. This is because the symptoms of concussion could also be symptoms of a more serious condition, such as: subdural haematoma \u2013 bleeding between the skull and the brain subarachnoid haemorrhage \u2013 bleeding on the surface of the brain Outlook While the medical term \"minor traumatic brain injury\" can sound serious, the actual extent of damage to the brain is usually minimal and does not cause long-term problems or complications. There is evidence that repeated episodes of concussion could cause long-term problems with mental abilities and trigger dementia. This type of dementia is known as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). However, this seems to only be a significant risk for professional athletes who experience repeated episodes of severe concussion, such as boxers \u2013 CTE is sometime nicknamed \"boxer's brain\". Post-concussion syndrome (PCS) is a poorly understood condition where symptoms of concussion can last for weeks or months afterwards. Read more information about PCS as a complication of concussion. Who's at risk? Most cases of concussion occur in children and teenagers aged 5 to 14, with the two most common causes being sporting and cycling accidents. Falls and motor vehicle accidents are a more common cause of concussion in older adults. People who regularly play competitive team sports such as football and rugby have a higher risk of concussion. Read more information about the causes of concussion and tips on preventing concussion. Community content from HealthUnlocked When to dial 999? Get advice on first aid and when to dial 999, including what information to pass on to emergency response units Page last reviewed: 12\/09\/2014 Next review due: 12\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 301 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 150  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Falls Minor head injury Road safety Severe head injury What to do if your child has an accident External links Brain & Spine Foundation Headway: minor head injuries and concussion Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents St John Ambulance: head injury Concussion Guidelines for the Education Sector (PDF, 1.25Mb) Cycling safety advice Cycling has many health benefits, but it's important to be safety conscious when out on the roads NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Condoms (male and female)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/male-condoms.aspx","content":"Male condoms - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Condoms A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the condom. At a glance: condoms   How a condom works   Who can use condoms   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks of condoms    Where to get condoms There are two types of condoms: male condoms, which are worn on the penis, and female condoms, which are worn inside the vagina. This page is about male condoms, where you can get them and how they work. Male condoms are made from very thin latex (rubber), polyisoprene or polyurethane, and are designed to stop a man's semen from coming into contact with his sexual partner. When condoms are used correctly during vaginal sex, they help to protect against pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections (STIs). When used correctly during anal and oral sex, they help to protect against STIs. Condoms are the only contraception that protect against pregnancy and STIs. At a glance: condoms If used correctly every time you have sex, male condoms are 98% effective. This means that two out of 100 women using male condoms as contraception will become pregnant in one year. You can get free condoms from contraception clinics, sexual health clinics and some GP surgeries. Oil-based products, such as moisturiser, lotion and Vaseline, can make latex and polyisoprene condoms less effective, but they are safe to use with condoms made from polyurethane. Water-based lubricant, available in pharmacies and sexual health clinics, is safe to use with all condoms. It's possible for a condom to slip off during sex. If this happens, you may need emergency contraception, and to get checked for STIs. Condoms need to be stored in places that aren't too hot or cold, and away from sharp or rough surfaces that could tear them or wear them away. Putting on a condom can be an enjoyable part of sex, and doesn't have to feel like an interruption. If you're sensitive to latex, you can use polyurethane or polyisoprene condoms instead.  A condom must not be used more than once. Use a new one each time you have sex. Condoms have a use-by date on the packaging. Don't use out-of-date condoms. Always buy condoms that have the BSI kite mark and the CE mark on the packet. This means that they've been tested to high safety standards. Condoms that don't have the BSI kite mark and CE mark won't meet these standards, so don't use them. How a condom works Condoms are a barrier method of contraception. They stop sperm from reaching an egg by creating a physical barrier between them. Condoms can also protect against STIs if used correctly during vaginal, anal and oral sex. It's important that the man's penis does not make contact with the woman's vagina before a condom has been put on. This is because semen can come out of the penis before a man has fully ejaculated (come). If this happens, or if semen leaks into the vagina while using a condom, seek advice about emergency contraception from your GP or contraception clinic. You should also consider having an STI test. How to use a condom  Take the condom out of the packet, taking care not to tear it with jewellery or fingernails \u2013 do not open the packet with your teeth. Place the condom over the tip of the erect penis. If there's a teat on the end of the condom, use your thumb and forefinger to squeeze the air out of it. Gently roll the condom down to the base of the penis. If the condom won't roll down, you're probably holding it the wrong way round \u2013 if this happens, throw the condom away because it may have sperm on it, and try again with a new one. After sex, withdraw the penis while it's still erect \u2013 hold the condom onto the base of the penis while you do this.  Remove the condom from the penis, being careful not to spill any semen. Throw the condom away in a bin, not down the toilet. Make sure the man's penis does not touch his partner's genital area again. If you have sex again, use a new condom. Condoms with spermicide Some male condoms come with spermicide on them. Spermicide is a chemical that kills sperm. These condoms are slowly being phased out, as research has found that a spermicide called nonoxynol 9 does not protect against STIs such as chlamydia and HIV, and may even increase the risk of infection. It is best to avoid using spermicide-lubricated condoms, or spermicide as an additional lubricant. Who can use condoms Most people can safely use condoms. There are many different varieties and brands of male condom, and it's up to you and your partner which type of condom you use. However, condoms may not be the most suitable method of contraception for everyone. Some men and women are sensitive to the chemicals in latex condoms. If this is a problem, polyurethane or polyisoprene condoms have a lower risk of causing an allergic reaction. Men who have difficulty keeping an erection may not be able to use male condoms, as the penis must be erect to prevent semen leaking from the condom, or the condom slipping off.  Advantages and disadvantages of condoms It is important to consider which form of contraception is right for you and your partner. Take care to use condoms correctly, and consider using other forms of contraception for extra protection. Advantages When used correctly and consistently, condoms are a reliable method of preventing pregnancy.  They help to protect both partners from STIs, including chlamydia, gonorrhoea and HIV. You only need to use them when you have sex \u2013 they do not need advance preparation and are suitable for unplanned sex. In most cases, there are no medical side effects from using condoms. Male condoms are easy to get hold of and come in a variety of shapes, sizes and flavours. Disadvantages Some couples find that using condoms interrupts sex \u2013 to get around this, try to make using a condom part of foreplay.  Condoms are very strong, but may split or tear if not used properly. Some people may be allergic to latex, plastic or spermicides \u2013 you can get condoms that are less likely to cause an allergic reaction. When using a male condom, the man has to pull out after he has ejaculated and before the penis goes soft, holding the condom firmly in place. If male condoms aren't used properly, they can slip off or split. If this happens, practise putting them on so that you get used to using them properly.   Can anything make condoms less effective? Sperm can sometimes get into the vagina during sex, even when using a condom. This may happen if: the penis touches the area around the vagina before a condom is put on the condom splits or comes off the condom gets damaged by sharp fingernails or jewellery you use oil-based lubricants, such as lotion, baby oil or petroleum jelly, with latex or polyisoprene condoms \u2013 this damages the condom  you are using medication for conditions like thrush, such as creams, pessaries or suppositories \u2013 this can damage latex and polyisoprene condoms and stop them working properly If you think that sperm has entered the vagina, talk to your GP or staff at a contraception clinic about emergency contraception and the risk of STIs. As well as condoms, you can use other forms of contraception, such as the contraceptive pill, for extra protection against pregnancy. However, other forms of contraception will not protect you against STIs. You will still be at risk of STIs if the condom breaks. Using lubricant Condoms come ready lubricated to make them easier to use, but you may also like to use additional lubricant, or lube. This is particularly advised for anal sex, to reduce the chance of the condom splitting. Any kind of lubricant can be used with condoms that are not made of latex. However, if you are using latex or polyisoprene condoms, do not use oil-based lubricants, such as: body oil or lotion petroleum jelly or creams (such as Vaseline) This is because they can damage the condom and make it more likely to split. If a condom splits or comes off If the condom splits or comes off, you can use emergency contraception to help prevent pregnancy. This is for emergencies only and shouldn't be used as a regular form of contraception. Depending on the type of pill, you need to take the emergency contraceptive pill up to 72 hours or up to 120 hours (five days) after unprotected sex. The intrauterine device (IUD) can be used as emergency contraception up to five days after sex. If you have been at risk of pregnancy, you have also been at risk of STIs. You should have a check-up at: a GP surgery a contraception clinic a sexual health clinic or genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic a young person's clinic Risks For most people, there are no serious risks associated with using condoms, although some people are allergic to latex condoms. You can get condoms that are less likely to cause an allergic reaction. Where to get condoms Everyone can get condoms for free, even if they are under 16. They are available from: contraception clinics sexual health or GUM (genitourinary medicine) clinics some GP surgeries  some young people's services Find sexual health services near you You can also buy condoms from: pharmacies supermarkets websites mail-order catalogues vending machines in some public toilets some petrol stations If you buy condoms online, make sure that you buy them from a pharmacist or other legitimate retailer. Always choose condoms that carry the BSI kite mark and the European CE mark as a sign of quality assurance. This means they have been tested to the required safety standards. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with young people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 13\/01\/2015 Next review due: 13\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 280 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Female condoms A female condom is worn inside the vagina to stop sperm entering the womb Condom tips Do you use condoms safely? Find out key facts, such as the 30-minute condom rule Related articles How do I use a condom? How does a female condom work? My partner won't use condoms External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Services near you Find and compare services Services Contraception information and advice Emergency contraception Free condoms GP Hospital Information and support for unplanned pregnancy Pharmacy Pregnancy testing Relationship counselling Sexual health information and support Sexual health services for young people STI testing and treatment Unwanted pregnancy Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose Contraception after a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after having a baby. Find out when to start contraception Sexually transmitted infections Find out about the different types of infections you can catch from having unprotected sex or genital contact Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Contraception","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/contraception-guide","content":"Contraception - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Your contraception guide Welcome to the contraception guide \"Where can I get contraception?\" \"Which method of contraception suits me?\" \"I'm under 16 \u2013 can I get contraception?\" Whatever questions you have about getting and using contraception, this guide can help. It aims to give practical information to everyone who wants to know more about contraception, including teenagers; women in their 20s, 30s and 40s; and anyone with a question about the method they use or are thinking about using. You can find out about the 15 methods that are available on the NHS, together with where to get them and how to decide which method might work best for you. Finding your way around If you're viewing on a computer screen, use the big green tabs at the top of the page to see a full menu for each section of the contraception guide. If you can't find what you are after, try the search box at the top of the page \u2013 it covers everything on the NHS Choices site. If you're viewing this on a mobile device, click the blue tab called \"Sections\" at the top of the page, and you'll see a list of all the topics covered in this guide. When you are on a page you like, be sure to check out the useful links and videos on the right-hand side. Popular subjects and pages You can start by finding out about the methods of contraception you can choose from, including how they work, who can use them and possible side effects. These methods are:  caps combined pill condoms (female) condoms (male) contraceptive implant contraceptive injection contraceptive patch diaphragms intrauterine device (IUD) intrauterine system (IUS) natural family planning progestogen-only pill vaginal ring There are two permanent methods of contraception: female sterilisation male sterilisation (vasectomy) You can also find out about: how effective contraception is, and how effective emergency contraception is Deciding which method suits you Which method works best for you depends on a number of factors, including your age, whether you smoke, your medical and family history, and any medication you're taking. Find out what you need to think about in Which method suits me? Where you can get contraception and emergency contraception Contraception is free on the NHS. Find out where to get contraception, and search by postcode to find: GPs near you  sexual health clinics near you  pharmacies near you  You can also find out where to get emergency contraception \u2013 the \"morning after pill\" or the IUD (coil). Common questions about contraception Get answers to some common questions about getting and using contraception, including: what to do if you're on the pill and you're sick or have diarrhoea using contraception after having a baby when your periods will come back after stopping the pill whether you can get a sterilisation reversal on the NHS Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2015 Next review due: 02\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 286 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 160  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Hospital Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Contraception clinics Find out what information and services you can expect from a contraception clinic External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for under 25s NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Confusion, sudden","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/confusion","content":"Confusion - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sudden confusion (delirium)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Confusion Introduction  Being in a state of confusion means not being able to think clearly or quickly, feeling disorientated, and struggling to pay attention, make decisions, or remember things. A simple test for confusion is to ask the person their name, age and today's date, and see if they seem unsure or answer incorrectly. It's understandable to fear the worst and assume it's a sign of dementia \u2013 but if the confusion came on over a short period of time (acute confusion), dementia is unlikely to be the sole cause. Read on to find out: what to do if someone is showing signs of confusion common causes of sudden confusion more unusual causes of sudden confusion What to do if someone is showing signs of confusion If the confusion has come on suddenly, take them to your nearest hospital or call 999 for an ambulance, especially if they're showing other signs of illness such as a fever, or their skin or lips are turning blue. If the person is diabetic... If the person is diabetic, check their blood sugar level. You can check this if they have a testing device with them. You'll need to prick their finger with the device and place the droplet of blood on the testing strip. Compare the reading with these target blood sugar levels. If the reading is high, take them to hospital or call 999. If the reading is low, give them a sugary snack or drink. Wait 10 minutes to see if they recover. If they don't, take them to hospital or call 999. While you wait for the ambulance Stay with them. Introduce yourself if you need to, reassure them, and remind them where they are at regular intervals. Check the person's medication cupboard \u2013 if in their home \u2013 and make a note of what drugs they're taking. Ask if any other family members have been unwell, to check whether carbon monoxide poisoning could be a possible cause of the confusion. Common causes of sudden confusion The most common causes of sudden confusion are: a lack of oxygen in the blood (hypoxia) \u2013 the cause could be anything from a severe asthma attack to a problem with the lungs or heart an infection anywhere in the body, especially in elderly people a stroke or TIA (\"mini stroke\") a low blood sugar level (hypoglycaemia) diabetic ketoacidosis, a serious complication of diabetes caused by a lack of insulin in the body certain medications, including digoxin, diuretics, steroids, and opiates alcohol poisoning or alcohol withdrawal drug misuse This information should give you a better idea of the cause of someone's confusion, but shouldn't be used as a diagnostic tool. Always see your doctor for a proper diagnosis. More unusual causes of sudden confusion Less common causes of sudden confusion are: an infection of the brain or its lining (encephalitis or meningitis) an imbalance of salts and minerals in the blood a severely underactive thyroid gland thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency a brain tumour hypoparathyroidism or hyperparathyroidism (rare hormone disorders) Cushing's disease (a tumour of the pituitary gland) an epileptic seizure carbon monoxide poisoning  Page last reviewed: 04\/12\/2015 Next review due: 04\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 16 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Your guide to care and support Memory loss External links Diabetes and memory loss Worried someone has dementia? If someone you know is becoming increasingly forgetful, encourage them to see their GP Memory loss What to do if you're worried, and the common causes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Congenital cataracts","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cataracts-childhood","content":"Childhood cataracts - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Childhood cataracts  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cataracts-childhood Clinical trials Childhood cataracts Cataracts-childhood Symptoms Cataracts-childhood Causes Cataracts-childhood Diagnosis Cataracts-childhood Treatment Cataracts-childhood Complications Introduction  Cataracts occur when changes in the lens of the eye cause it to become less transparent (clear). This results in cloudy or misty vision. The lens is the transparent structure located just behind the pupil (the black circle in the centre of the eye). It allows light to pass through to the light-sensitive layer of tissue at the back of the eye (retina). Cataracts most commonly affect older adults (age-related cataracts), but some babies are born with cataracts and children can also develop them at a young age. These are known as childhood cataracts. Childhood cataracts are often referred to as: congenital cataracts \u2013 cataracts present when a baby is born or shortly afterwards developmental, infantile or juvenile cataracts \u2013 cataracts diagnosed in older babies or children Cataracts in babies and children are rare. It's estimated they affect between three and four in every 10,000 children in the UK. Symptoms of cataracts in children In children, cataracts can affect one or both eyes. Cloudy patches in the lens can sometimes get bigger and more can develop, resulting in the child's vision becoming increasingly affected. As well as poor vision, cataracts can also cause \"wobbling eyes\" and a squint (where the eyes point in different directions).  When your child is very young, it can be difficult to spot signs of cataracts. However, your baby's eyes will be routinely examined within 72 hours of birth and again when they're six to eight weeks old. Sometimes, cataracts can develop in children after these screening tests. It's particularly important to spot cataracts in children quickly because early treatment can reduce the risk of long-term vision problems. Therefore, you should visit your GP or tell your health visitor if you have any concerns about your child's eyesight. Read more about the symptoms of childhood cataracts and diagnosing childhood cataracts. What causes cataracts in children? There are a number of reasons why a child may be born with cataracts or develop them while they're still young. However, in many cases it isn't possible to determine the exact cause. Possible causes include: a genetic fault inherited from the child's parents that caused the lens to develop abnormally certain genetic conditions, including Down's syndrome certain infections picked up by the mother during pregnancy, including rubella and chickenpox an injury to the eye after birth Read more about the causes of childhood cataracts. How childhood cataracts are treated Cataracts in children are often not too bad and have little or no effect on their vision. However, if cataracts are affecting your child's vision, they can slow down or stop their normal sight development. In these cases, surgery to remove the affected lens (or lenses) will usually be recommended as soon as possible. Replacing the focusing power of the lens is as important as the surgery to remove it. The affected lens may sometimes be replaced with an artificial lens during surgery, although it's more common for the child to wear contact lenses or glasses after surgery to compensate for the lens that was removed. It can be difficult to predict exactly how much better your child's vision will be after treatment, although it's likely there will always be a degree of reduced vision in the affected eye (or eyes). However, many children with childhood cataracts are able to live a full and normal life. Read more about treating childhood cataracts. What are the risks? Cataracts that affect vision that aren't quickly treated can sometimes cause irreversible damage to eyesight, including a permanently lazy eye and even blindness in severe cases. Cataract surgery is generally successful, with a low risk of serious complications. The most common risk associated with cataract surgery is a condition that can affect artificial lens implants called posterior capsule opacification (PCO), which causes cloudy vision to return. Another important risk of surgery is glaucoma, where pressure builds inside the eye. Without successful treatment, glaucoma can cause irreversible damage to key structures in the eye. Although some of the possible complications of cataract surgery can affect your child's vision, they can often be treated with medication or further surgery. Read more about the complications of childhood cataracts. Can cataracts in children be prevented? It's not usually possible to prevent cataracts, particularly those that are inherited (run in the family). However, following the advice of your midwife or GP to avoid infections during pregnancy (including making sure all your vaccinations are up to date before getting pregnant) may reduce the chances of your child being born with cataracts. If you have previously had a baby with childhood cataracts and are planning another pregnancy, you may wish to speak with your GP about whether genetic counselling would be appropriate. Genetic counselling can help couples who may be at risk of passing an inherited condition on to their child. Read more about infections in pregnancy and genetic testing and counselling. Information about your child If your child has had cataracts, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 11\/01\/2016 Next review due: 11\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 41 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Sight tests for children Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out when children need eye tests, what the test involves and why it's important. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Age-related cataracts Cataract surgery Children's eyes Eye tests for children Find an optician Find visual impairment support External links RNIB: cataracts The Eyecare Trust Blind Children UK Baby health and development reviews Find out when your baby will have their health and development reviews, and what happens at each one Eyecare services FAQ Find out what health professionals you will meet at your local optician, how to complain if things go wrong and other useful tips about NHS eye services NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Congenital CMV (cytomegalovirus)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Cytomegalovirus\/Pages\/Symptoms.aspx","content":"Cytomegalovirus (CMV) - Symptoms - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cytomegalovirus (CMV) - Symptoms  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cytomegalovirus Clinical trials Cytomegalovirus Cytomegalovirus Symptoms Cytomegalovirus Causes Cytomegalovirus Treatment Cytomegalovirus Prevention Symptoms of cytomegalovirus (CMV)  Most cases of CMV don't cause any symptoms and you may not even realise you're infected.  If you do experience symptoms, they'll be similar to flu symptoms or symptoms of glandular fever. They can include: a high temperature of 38C (100.4F) or above extreme tiredness sore throat  swollen glands muscle and joint pain loss of appetite hepatitis (inflammation of the liver)  These symptoms will usually last for a couple of weeks. If CMV recurs in someone who's otherwise healthy, including during pregnancy, it will cause few, if any, symptoms. Weakened immune system Active CMV infection in someone with a weakened immune system can cause a wide range of symptoms, including: a high temperature diarrhoea  shortness of breath  visual problems \u2013 such as blind spots, blurring and floaters pneumonia (lung infection) retinitis \u2013 inflammation of the retina (the light-sensitive layer of tissue at the back of the eye) hepatitis  These symptoms occur because the virus can quickly spread throughout the body, damaging one or more organs, particularly the digestive system, lungs and eyes. Contact your GP or treatment team immediately if you have one or more of the above symptoms and your immune system is weakened by HIV or organ transplantation. Congenital CMV Around 13% of babies born with congenital CMV will have symptoms at birth. A similar number of babies who don't have symptoms at birth will develop problems at a later stage. Symptoms at birth Symptoms of congenital CMV at birth can include: jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes) pneumonia a rash consisting of small, purplish spots an enlarged liver and spleen low birth weight seizures (fits) small head  Some of these symptoms can be treated, but some babies will develop long-term conditions as a result of the infection. Long-term problems A small proportion of babies with congenital CMV (including those with no symptoms at birth) will develop one or more physical or mental problems at a later stage. These can include: hearing loss (see below) visual impairment or blindness learning difficulties dyspraxia (lack of physical co-ordination) epilepsy CMV infection is responsible for around 25% of cases of hearing loss during childhood. Hearing loss caused by congenital CMV may develop during the first few years of life. This usually gets worse over time. It can also be permanent and range from mild to total. The hearing problems can affect either one or both ears. Children with hearing loss in both ears are also likely to experience difficulties with speech and communication as they get older. Page last reviewed: 17\/11\/2014 Next review due: 17\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 70 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Hearing impairment HIV and AIDS Infections during pregnancy Pregnancy and CMV External links AVERT: common HIV opportunistic infections BCM: about CMV CMV Action Newborn jaundice Find out about newborn jaundice, a common and usually harmless condition in newborn babies that causes yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Congenital heart disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Congenital-heart-disease","content":"Congenital heart disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Congenital heart disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Congenital-heart-disease Clinical trials Congenital heart disease Congenital-heart-disease Types Congenital-heart-disease Symptoms Congenital-heart-disease Causes Congenital-heart-disease Diagnosis Congenital-heart-disease Treatment Congenital-heart-disease Complications Congenital-heart-disease Prevention Introduction  Congenital heart disease is a general term for a range of birth defects that affect the normal workings of the heart. The term \"congenital\" means the condition is present at birth. Congenital heart disease is one of the most common types of birth defect, affecting up to 9 in every 1,000 babies born in the UK. Why it happens In most cases, no obvious cause of congenital heart disease is identified. However, some things are known to increase the risk of the condition, including: Down's syndrome \u2013 a genetic disorder that affects a baby's normal physical development and causes learning difficulties the mother having certain infections, such as rubella, during pregnancy the mother having poorly controlled type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes other chromosome defects, where genes may be altered from normal and can be inherited  Read more about the causes of congenital heart disease and preventing congenital heart disease. Many cases of congenital heart disease are diagnosed before a baby is born during an ultrasound scan in pregnancy. However, it's not always possible to detect congenital heart defects in this way. Signs and symptoms Congenital heart disease can have a number of symptoms, including: rapid heartbeat rapid breathing excessive sweating extreme tiredness and fatigue a blue tinge to the skin (cyanosis) tiredness and rapid breathing when a baby is feeding  These problems are sometimes noticeable soon after birth, although mild defects may not cause any problems until later in life. Read more about the symptoms of congenital heart disease and diagnosing congenital heart disease. Types of congenital heart disease There are many types of congenital heart disease and they sometimes occur in combination. Some of the more common defects include: septal defects \u2013 where there's a hole between two of the heart's chambers (commonly referred to as a \"hole in the heart\") coarctation of the aorta \u2013 where the main large artery of the body, called the aorta, is narrower than normal pulmonary valve stenosis \u2013 where the pulmonary valve, which controls the flow of blood out of the lower right chamber of the heart to the lungs, is narrower than normal transposition of the great arteries \u2013 where the pulmonary and aortic valves and the arteries they're connected to have swapped positions Read more about the types of congenital heart disease. Treating congenital heart disease Treatment for congenital heart disease usually depends on the defect you or your child has. Mild defects, such as holes in the heart, often don't need to be treated, as they may improve on their own and may not cause any further problems. Surgery or interventional procedures are usually required if the defect is significant and causing problems. Modern surgical techniques can often restore most or all of the heart's normal function, and nowadays about 80% of children with congenital heart disease will survive into adulthood. However, people with congenital heart disease often need treatment throughout their life and therefore require specialist review during childhood and adulthood. This is because people with complex heart problems can develop further problems with their heart rhythm or valves over time. Most surgery and interventional procedures aren't considered to be a cure. The affected person's ability to exercise may be limited, which can progress over time and may lead to the need for further surgery or intervention. Some people with more complex congenital heart disease may not have a normal life span. It's important that a person with heart disease and their parents or carers discuss these issues with their specialist medical team. Read more about treating congenital heart disease and the complications of congenital heart disease. Information about your child If your child has congenital heart disease, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. The heart The heart is divided into four main sections called chambers. These are known as the: left atrium (collects blood returning from the lungs) left ventricle (the main pumping chamber for the body) right atrium (collects blood returning from the body's veins) right ventricle (pumps bloods to the lungs)  There are also four valves controlling how the blood flows through the heart and around the body. These are known as the: mitral valve (separating the left atrium from the left ventricle) aortic valve (separating the left ventricle from the main artery, the aorta) tricuspid valve (separating the right atrium from the right ventricle) pulmonary valve (separating the right ventricle from the pulmonary artery to the lung) Congenital heart disease can occur if any of these chambers or valves doesn't develop properly while a baby is in the womb. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/06\/2015 Next review due: 05\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 146 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Hole in the heart Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Congenital heart disease refers to a series of birth defects that affect the heart. A paediatric cardiologist explains the different types of congenital heart disease and how each of them is treated. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Congenital heart disease in pregnancy Endocarditis Heart failure Heart transplant External links Children's Heart Federation Understanding children's heart surgery outcomes Down's Heart Group healthtalk.org: real stories Heart Research UK Little Hearts Matter NHS England: congenital heart disease review The Somerville Foundation Tiny Tickers Congenital heart disease in pregnancy Find out how your pregnancy can be affected if you were born with a heart abnormality, and why it's vital to see a cardiologist Baby health and development reviews Find out when your baby will have their health and development reviews, and what happens at each one NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Congenital hip dislocation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/developmental-dysplasia-of-the-hip","content":"Developmental dysplasia of the hip Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Developmental dysplasia of the hip  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Developmental dysplasia of the hip Introduction  Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is a condition where the 'ball and socket' joint of the hips doesn't properly form in babies and young children. It's sometimes known as congenital hip dislocation or hip dysplasia. The hip joint attaches the thigh bone (femur) to the pelvis. The top of the femur (femoral head) is rounded like a ball and sits inside the cup-shaped hip socket. In DDH, the socket of the hip is too shallow and the femoral head isn't held tightly in place, so the hip joint is loose. In severe cases, the femur can come out of the socket (dislocate). DDH may affect one or both hips but is more common in the left hip. It's also more common in girls and firstborn children. About 1 or 2 in every 1,000 babies have DDH that needs treating. Without treatment, DDH may lead to problems later in life, including: developing a limp hip pain \u2013 especially during the teenage years painful and stiff joints (osteoarthritis) With early diagnosis and treatment, most children are able to develop normally and have a full range of movement in their hip. Diagnosing DDH Within 72 hours of giving birth, your baby's hips will be checked as part of the newborn physical examination. Another hip examination is carried out when your baby is between six and eight weeks old. The examination involves gentle manipulation of your baby's hip joints to check if there are any problems, and shouldn't cause them any discomfort. An ultrasound scan is usually recommended within a few weeks if: the hip feels unstable there's a family history of childhood hip problems your baby was born in the breech position (feet first with their bottom downwards) you've had twins or a multiple birth your baby was born prematurely \u2013 before the 37th week of pregnancy Sometimes a baby's hip stabilises on its own before the scan is due. Treating DDH Pavlik harness Babies diagnosed with DDH early in life are usually treated with a fabric splint known as a Pavlik harness. This secures both of your baby's hips in a stable position and allows them to develop normally. The harness needs to be worn constantly for several weeks and shouldn't be removed by anyone except a health professional. The harness may be adjusted during follow-up appointments and your clinician will discuss your baby's progress with you. Your hospital will provide detailed instructions on how to look after your baby while they're in a Pavlik harness. This will include information on: how to change your baby's clothes without removing the harness (nappies can be worn normally) cleaning the harness if it's soiled \u2013 it still shouldn't be removed, but may be cleaned with detergent and an old toothbrush or nail brush positioning your baby while they sleep \u2013 they should be placed on their back and not on their side how to help avoid skin irritation around the straps of the harness \u2013 you may be advised to wrap some soft, hygienic material around the bands Eventually, you may be given advice on removing and replacing the harness for short periods of time until it can be permanently removed. You'll be encouraged to allow your baby to move freely when the harness is off and swimming is often recommended. Surgery Surgery may be needed if your baby is diagnosed with DDH after they're six months old, or if the Pavlik harness hasn't worked. The most common surgical technique is known as reduction, which involves placing the ball of the femur back into the hip socket. Reduction is carried out under general anaesthetic and may be performed as either: closed reduction \u2013 the ball is placed in the socket without making any large cuts (incisions) open reduction \u2013 an incision is made in the groin to allow the surgeon to place the ball in the socket Your child will need a hip cast for at least six weeks after surgery. Their hip will need to be checked under general anaesthetic again after this time to make sure it's stable and healing well. After this investigation, a cast will probably be needed for at least another six weeks to allow the hip to fully stabilise. Some children may also require bone surgery (osteotomy) during an open reduction, or at a later date to correct any bone deformities. Late-stage signs of DDH The newborn physical examination and the check at six to eight weeks aim to diagnose DDH early. However, sometimes hip problems can develop after these checks. It's important to contact your GP as soon as possible if you notice your child develops any of the following symptoms: restricted movement in one leg when you change their nappy one leg drags behind the other when they crawl one leg appears longer than the other uneven skin folds in the buttocks or thighs a limp, walking on toes or developing an abnormal 'waddling' walk Your child will be referred to an orthopaedic specialist in hospital for an ultrasound scan or an X-ray if your doctor thinks there's a problem with their hip. Preventing DDH It's important to remember that DDH can't be prevented and it's nobody's fault. A baby's hips are naturally more flexible for a short period after birth. However, if your baby spends a lot of time tightly wrapped with their legs straight and pressed together (swaddled), there's a risk this may slow their hip development. Using 'hip healthy' swaddling techniques can reduce this risk. Make sure your baby is able to move their hips and knees freely to kick. You can read about hip-healthy swaddling on The International Hip Dysplasia Institute website. Page last reviewed: 06\/08\/2015 Next review due: 06\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 24 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful How to prepare for your child's hospital stay Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A practical guide on how to prepare for your child going into hospital, including information on what to bring and the facilities available for both parents and children. Facilities may vary from one hospital to another \u2013 this video uses Royal Alexandra Children's Hospital in Brighton as an example. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Newborn physical examination A limp in a child External links STEPS charity Newborn and infant physical examination screening - GOV.UK International Hip Dysplasia Institute Newborn physical examination All new parents are offered a physical examination for their newborn. Find out what's involved NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Congestive heart failure","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Heart-failure","content":"Heart failure - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Heart failure  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Heart-failure Clinical trials Heart-failure Heart failure Heart-failure Symptoms Heart-failure Diagnosis Heart-failure Treatment Heart-failure Living with   Heart failure means that the heart is unable to pump blood around the body properly. It usually occurs because the heart has become too weak or stiff. It's sometimes called \"congestive\" heart failure, although this name isn't widely used nowadays. Heart failure doesn't mean your heart has stopped working \u2013 it just needs some support to help it work better. It can occur at any age, but is most common in older people. Heart failure is a long-term condition that tends to get gradually worse over time. It can't usually be cured, but the symptoms can often be controlled for many years. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Causes Treatment Outlook Symptoms of heart failure The main symptoms of heart failure are: breathlessness after activity or at rest feeling tired most of the time and finding exercise exhausting swollen ankles and legs Some people also experience other symptoms, such as a persistent cough, a fast heart rate, and dizziness. Symptoms can develop quickly (acute heart failure) or gradually over weeks or months (chronic heart failure). Read more about the symptoms of heart failure. When to get medical advice See your GP if you experience persistent or gradually worsening symptoms of heart failure. Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible if you have sudden or very severe symptoms. A number of tests can be used to help check how well your heart is working, including blood tests, an electrocardiogram (ECG) and an echocardiogram. Read more about how heart failure is diagnosed. Causes of heart failure Heart failure is often the result of a number of problems affecting the heart at the same time. Conditions that can lead to heart failure include: coronary heart disease \u2013 where the arteries that supply blood to the heart become clogged up with fatty substances (atherosclerosis), which may cause angina or a heart attack high blood pressure \u2013 this can put extra strain on the heart, which over time can lead to heart failure cardiomyopathy \u2013 conditions affecting the heart muscle heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias) \u2013 such as atrial fibrillation damage or other problems with the heart valves congenital heart disease \u2013 birth defects that affect the normal workings of the heart Sometimes anaemia, excessive alcohol consumption, an overactive thyroid, or high pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension) can also lead to heart failure. Treatments for heart failure Treatment for heart failure usually aims to control the symptoms for as long as possible and slow down the progression of the condition. Common treatments include: lifestyle changes \u2013 including eating a healthy diet, exercising regularly and stopping smoking medication \u2013 a range of medicines can help; many people need to take two or three different types devices implanted in your chest \u2013 these can help control your heart rhythm surgery \u2013 such as a bypass operation or a heart transplant Treatment will usually be needed for life. A cure may be possible when heart failure has a treatable cause. For example, if your heart valves are damaged, replacing or repairing them may cure the condition. Read more about how heart failure is treated and living with heart failure. Outlook for heart failure Heart failure is a serious long-term condition that will usually continue to get slowly worse over time. It can severely limit the activities you're able to do and is often eventually fatal. But it's very difficult to predict how the condition will progress on an individual basis. It's very unpredictable \u2013 many people remain stable for many years, while in some cases it may get worse quickly. Overall, around half of people with heart failure live at least five years after their diagnosis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 01\/08\/2016 Next review due: 01\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 620 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 320  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 157  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atherosclerosis Atrial fibrillation Coronary heart disease Heart attack High blood pressure External links British Heart Foundation: heart failure healthtalk.org: heart failure heartfailurematters.org The Somerville Foundation Find and choose services for Heart failure Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Conjunctivitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Conjunctivitis-infective","content":"Conjunctivitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Conjunctivitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Conjunctivitis-infective Clinical trials Conjunctivitis Conjunctivitis-infective Symptoms Conjunctivitis-infective Causes Conjunctivitis-infective Diagnosis Conjunctivitis-infective Treatment Conjunctivitis-infective Complications   Conjunctivitis is a common condition that causes redness and inflammation of the thin layer of tissue that covers the front of the eye (the conjunctiva). People often refer to conjunctivitis as red eye. Other symptoms of conjunctivitis include itchiness and watering of the eyes, and sometimes a sticky coating on the eyelashes (if it's caused by an allergy). Read more about the symptoms of conjunctivitis. Conjunctivitis can affect one eye at first, but usually affects both eyes after a few hours. What causes conjunctivitis? The conjunctiva can become inflamed as a result of: a bacterial or viral infection \u2013 this is known as infective conjunctivitis an allergic reaction to a substance such as pollen or dust mites \u2013 this is known as allergic conjunctivitis the eye coming into contact with things that can irritate the conjunctiva, such as shampoo or chlorinated water, or a loose eyelash rubbing against the eye \u2013 this is known as irritant conjunctivitis Read more about the causes of conjunctivitis. Treating conjunctivitis Treatment isn't usually needed for conjunctivitis, because the symptoms often clear up within a couple of weeks. If treatment is needed, the type of treatment will depend on the cause. In severe cases, antibiotic eye drops can be used to clear the infection. Irritant conjunctivitis will clear up as soon as whatever is causing it is removed. Allergic conjunctivitis can usually be treated with anti-allergy medications such as antihistamines. If possible, you should avoid the substance that triggered the allergy. It's best not to wear contact lenses until the symptoms have cleared up. Any sticky or crusty coating on the eyelids or lashes can be cleansed with cotton wool and water. Washing your hands regularly and not sharing pillows or towels will help prevent it spreading. Read more about treating conjunctivitis. See your GP immediately if you have: eye pain sensitivity to light (photophobia) disturbed vision intense redness in one eye or both eyes a newborn baby with conjunctivitis  Work and school Public Health England (PHE) advises that you don't need to stay away from work or school if you or your child has conjunctivitis, unless you (or they) are feeling particularly unwell. If there are a number of conjunctivitis cases at your child's school or nursery, you may be advised to keep them away until their infection has cleared up. Generally, adults who work in close contact with others, or share equipment such as phones and computers, shouldn't return to work until the discharge has cleared up. Complications Conjunctivitis can be a frustrating condition \u2013 particularly allergic conjunctivitis \u2013 but in most cases it doesn't pose a serious threat to health. Complications of conjunctivitis are rare, but when they do occur they can be serious and include: a severe case of allergic conjunctivitis can lead to scarring in the eye in cases of infective conjunctivitis, the infection can spread to other areas of the body, triggering more serious secondary infections, such as meningitis Read more about the complications of conjunctivitis. Neonatal conjunctivitis Neonatal conjunctivitis is a type of conjunctivitis that affects newborn babies less than 28 days old. Most cases of neonatal conjunctivitis aren't particularly serious. A small number of cases occur if a baby is born to a mother who has a sexually transmitted infection (STI), such as chlamydia or gonorrhoea. These infections don't necessarily cause symptoms in the mother, so many of them are unaware they're infected. With STIs, there's a possibility of serious complications if the infection is left untreated. Contact your GP if you notice any redness in your baby\u2019s eyes. Page last reviewed: 23\/03\/2016 Next review due: 23\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1042 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 474  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 289  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 103  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 118  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Allergies Blepharitis Contact lens safety Eye health External links GOSH: conjunctivitis Look after your eyes: bacterial conjunctivitis Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Consent to treatment","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Consent-to-treatment","content":"Consent to treatment - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Consent to treatment  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Consent-to-treatment Clinical trials Consent to treatment Consent-to-treatment Assessing capacity Consent-to-treatment Children and young people   Consent to treatment is the principle that a person must give permission before they receive any type of medical treatment, test or examination. This must be done on the basis of an explanation by a clinician. Consent from a patient is needed regardless of the procedure \u2013 whether it's a physical examination, organ donation or something else. The principle of consent is an important part of medical ethics and the international human rights law. This topic covers: Defining consent How consent is given Consent from children and young people When consent isn't needed Consent and life-sustaining treatment Complaints Defining consent For consent to be valid, it must be voluntary and informed, and the person consenting must have the capacity to make the decision. These terms are explained below: Voluntary \u2013 the decision to either consent or not to consent to treatment must be made by the person themselves, and must not be influenced by pressure from medical staff, friends or family. Informed \u2013 the person must be given all of the information in terms of what the treatment involves, including the benefits and risks, whether there are reasonable alternative treatments and what will happen if treatment doesn't go ahead. Capacity \u2013 the person must be capable of giving consent, which means they understand the information given to them, and they can use it to make an informed decision. If an adult has the capacity to make a voluntary and informed decision to consent to or refuse a particular treatment, their decision must be respected. This is still the case even if refusing treatment would result in their death, or the death of their unborn child. If a person doesn't have the capacity to make a decision about their treatment, the healthcare professionals treating them can go ahead and give treatment if they believe it's in the person\u2019s best interests. However, the clinicians must take reasonable steps to seek advice from the patient\u2019s friends or relatives before making these decisions. Read more about assessing the capacity to consent. How consent is given Consent can be given: verbally \u2013 for example, by saying they're happy to have an X-ray in writing \u2013 for example, by signing a consent form for surgery Someone could also give non-verbal consent, as long as they understand the treatment or examination about to take place \u2013 for example, holding out an arm for a blood test. Consent should be given to the healthcare professional directly responsible for the person's current treatment, such as: a nurse arranging a blood test a GP prescribing new medication a surgeon planning an operation If someone is going to have a major medical procedure, such as an operation, their consent should ideally be secured well in advance, so they have plenty of time to obtain information about the procedure and ask questions. If they change their mind at any point before the procedure, the person is entitled to withdraw their previous consent. Consent from children and young people If they're able to, consent is usually given by patients themselves. However, someone with parental responsibility may need to give consent for a child up to the age of 16 to have treatment. Read more about the rules of consent applying to children and young people When consent isn't needed There are a few exceptions when treatment may be able to go ahead without the person's consent, even if they're capable of giving their permission. It may not be necessary to obtain consent if a person: requires emergency treatment to save their life, but they're incapacitated (for example, they're unconscious) \u2013 the reasons why treatment was necessary should be fully explained once they've recovered immediately requires an additional emergency procedure during an operation \u2013 there has to be a clear medical reason why it would be unsafe to wait to obtain consent, and it can't be simply for convenience with a severe mental health condition \u2013 such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or dementia \u2013 lacks the capacity to consent to the treatment of their mental health (under the Mental Health Act 1983) \u2013 in these cases, treatment for unrelated physical conditions still requires consent, which the patient may be able to provide, despite their mental illness requires hospital treatment for a severe mental health condition, but self-harmed or attempted suicide while competent and is refusing treatment (under the Mental Health Act 1983) \u2013 the person's nearest relative or an approved social worker must make an application for the person to be forcibly kept in hospital, and two doctors must assess the person's condition is a risk to public health (due to rabies, cholera or tuberculosis (TB) is severely ill and living in unhygienic conditions (under the National Assistance Act 1948) \u2013 a person who is severely ill or infirm and is living in unsanitary conditions can be taken to a place of care without their consent Consent and life-sustaining treatments A person may be being kept alive with supportive treatments \u2013 such as lung ventilation \u2013 without having made an advance decision, which outlines the care they would refuse to receive. In these cases, a decision about continuing or stopping treatment needs to be made based on what that person's best interests are believed to be. To help reach a decision, the healthcare professionals responsible for the person\u2019s care should discuss the issue with the relatives and friends of the person receiving the treatment. They should consider, among other things: what the person's quality of life will be if treatment is continued how long the person may live if treatment is continued whether there's any chance of the person recovering Treatment can be withdrawn if there's an agreement that continuing treatment isn't in the person's best interests. The case will be referred to the courts before further action is taken if: an agreement can't be reached a decision has to be made on whether to withdraw treatment from someone who has been in a state of impaired consciousness for a long time (usually at least 12 months) It's important to note the difference between withdrawing a person's life support and taking a deliberate action to make them die. For example, injecting a lethal drug would illegal. Complaints If you believe you've received treatment you didn't consent to, you can make an official complaint. Read more about how to make a complaint. Page last reviewed: 03\/03\/2016 Next review due: 03\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 123 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful What does patient choice mean to you? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. People talk about choices they have made for their health, lifestyle, NHS treatment, and NHS services. Media last reviewed: 23\/05\/2016 Next review due: 23\/05\/2019 Useful links NHS Choices links End of life care Advance decisions Do I have the right to refuse treatment? External links GOV.UK: consent guide GOV.UK: MCA code of practice GMC: making complaints NHS Constitution Mind: Mental Health Act NHS hospital services Find out how NHS hospitals operate, whether services are free and how to choose and a hospital that best suits your needs NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Constipation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Constipation","content":"Constipation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Constipation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Constipation Clinical trials Constipation Constipation Symptoms Constipation Causes Constipation Diagnosis Constipation Treatment Constipation Complications Constipation Prevention Introduction  Constipation is a common condition that affects people of all ages. It can mean that you're not passing stools regularly or you're unable to completely empty your bowel. Constipation can also cause your stools to be hard and lumpy, as well as unusually large or small. The severity of constipation varies from person to person. Many people only experience constipation for a short time, but for others, constipation can be a long-term (chronic) condition that causes significant pain and discomfort and affects quality of life. Read more about the symptoms of constipation. What causes constipation? It's often difficult to identify the exact cause of constipation. However, there are a number of things that contribute to the condition, including: not eating enough fibre, such as fruit, vegetables and cereals a change in your routine or lifestyle, such as a change in your eating habits ignoring the urge to pass stools side effects of certain medications not drinking enough fluids anxiety or depression In children, poor diet, fear about using the toilet and problems toilet training can all lead to constipation. Read more about the causes of constipation. Who's affected Constipation can occur in babies, children and adults. It's estimated that around one in every seven adults and up to one in every three children in the UK has constipation at any one time. The condition affects twice as many women as men and is also more common in older adults and during pregnancy. When to see your GP You may be able to treat constipation yourself by making simple changes to your diet and lifestyle (see below). If these changes don't help and the problem continues, you should see your GP. Also speak to your GP if you think your child might be constipated. Read more about diagnosing constipation. Treating constipation Diet and lifestyle changes are usually recommended as the first treatment for constipation. This includes gradually increasing your daily intake of fibre, making sure you drink plenty of fluids, and trying to get more exercise. If these aren't effective, your GP may prescribe an oral laxative medication that can help you empty your bowels. Treatment for constipation is effective, although in some cases it can take several months before a regular bowel pattern is re-established. Read more about treating constipation. Preventing constipation Making the diet and lifestyle changes mentioned above can also help to reduce your risk of developing constipation in the first place. Giving yourself enough time and privacy to pass stools comfortably may also help, and you should try not to ignore the urge to go to the toilet. Read more about preventing constipation. Complications For most people constipation rarely causes complications, but people with long-term constipation can develop: haemorrhoids (piles) faecal impaction (where dry, hard stools collect in the rectum) bowel incontinence (the leakage of liquid stools) Read more about the complications of constipation. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/12\/2015 Next review due: 24\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 764 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 235  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 211  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 139  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Digestive health Foods for good digestion Haemorrhoids Irritable bowel syndrome Laxatives External links British Nutrition Foundation Education and Resources for Improving Childhood Continence (ERIC) The IBS Network Digestive health Find out how to beat common digestive problems like bloating and indigestion Eat right for your digestion How to eat and drink to ensure good digestion, including the foods to avoid and which ones to fill up on Five top tips for a healthy tummy Five ways to banish common digestive problems such as heartburn, constipation and bloating NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Constipation in children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/constipation-and-soiling.aspx","content":"Constipation in young children - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Constipation in young children Constipation is common in childhood, particularly when children are being potty trained at around two to three years old. If your child doesn't poo at least three times a week, and their poo is often hard and difficult to push out, they may be constipated. Their poo may be large, or it may look like \"rabbit droppings\" or little pellets. If your child is already potty trained, soiled pants can be another sign of constipation, as runny poo (diarrhoea) may leak out around the hard, constipated poo. This is called overflow soiling. If your child is constipated, they may find it painful to poo. This creates a vicious circle: the more it hurts, the more they hold back. The more constipated they get, the more it hurts. Even if pooing isn\u2019t painful, once your child is really constipated, they will stop wanting to go to the toilet altogether. Why children get constipated Your child may be constipated because they are not eating enough high-fibre foods like fruit and veg, not drinking enough or have problems potty (or toilet) training. Constipation can also suggest that your child is worried or anxious about something. Their worry may be about a big change such as moving house, starting nursery or the arrival of a new baby. Find out about other causes of constipation in children. How to treat your child\u2019s constipation Take your child to the GP if you think they may be constipated. The treatment that may be recommended for constipation will depend on your child\u2019s age. Laxatives are often recommended for children who have been weaned, alongside diet and lifestyle changes. The longer your child is constipated, the more difficult it can be for them to get back to normal, so make sure you get help early. It may take several months for the treatments to work, but keep trying until they do. Remember that laxative treatment may make your child's overflow soiling worse before it gets better. Getting constipated and soiling their clothes isn\u2019t something your child is doing on purpose, so there\u2019s no reason to get cross with them. You may both find the situation stressful, but staying calm and relaxed is the best attitude to help your child deal with the problem. Your health visitor can offer helpful tips. Preventing constipation Once your child\u2019s constipation has been dealt with, it\u2019s important to do everything you can to stop it coming back. Your GP may advise that your child keeps taking laxatives for a while to make sure their poo stays soft enough to push out regularly. Here are some more tips: Make sure your child has six to eight drinks a day \u2013 this includes breastfeeding and formula milk feeds. Give your child a variety of foods, including plenty of fruit and vegetables, which are a good source of fibre. Read about what to feed young children. Encourage your child to be physically active. For more information, read the physical activity guidelines for children aged under five years. Get your child into a routine of regularly sitting on the potty or toilet, after meals or before bed, and praise them whether or not they poo each time. This is particularly important for boys, who may forget about pooing once they are weeing standing up. Make sure your child can rest their feet flat on the floor or a step when they\u2019re using the potty or toilet, to get them in a good position for pooing. The Education and Resources for Improving Childhood Continence (ERIC) guide to children\u2019s bowel problems has a picture of this position. Ask them to tell you if they feel worried about using the potty or toilet \u2013 some children don\u2019t want to poo in certain situations, such as at nursery. Stay calm and reassuring, so that your child doesn\u2019t see going to the toilet as a stressful situation \u2013 you want your child to see pooing as a normal part of life, not something to be ashamed of. If you'd like advice on taking the stress out of going to the toilet, speak to your health visitor. More information and support You can contact ERIC for support. You can also call the helpline on 0845 370 8008 from Monday to Thursday 10am to 2pm, or email a question to helpline@eric.org.uk. ERIC runs a Let\u2019s talk about poo campaign to raise awareness of constipation in young children, and suggests ways to help your child. Here are a few more sites that offer useful tips:  ERIC: Let's talk about poo game NICE: constipation in children and young people Page last reviewed: 09\/10\/2015 Next review due: 09\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 126 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Constipation Encopresis (soiling of clothes in children) Potty training tips Wetting the bed How to potty train Learn the signs that your child may be ready to start potty training, and how to teach your child to use a potty Wetting the bed Bedwetting is normal for under-fives. These tips may help you deal with bedwetting at night and help your child stay dry Sign up for emails Get weekly pregnancy and baby emails, linking to articles and over 100 videos of experts, mums and dads Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Contact dermatitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/eczema-(contact-dermatitis)","content":"Contact dermatitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contact dermatitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Eczema-(contact-dermatitis) Clinical trials Eczema-(contact-dermatitis) Community Contact dermatitis Eczema-(contact-dermatitis) Symptoms Eczema-(contact-dermatitis) Causes Eczema-(contact-dermatitis) Diagnosis Eczema-(contact-dermatitis) Treatment Eczema-(contact-dermatitis) Prevention Introduction  Contact dermatitis is inflammation of the skin that occurs when you come into contact with a particular substance. It can be caused by: an irritant \u2013 a substance that directly damages the outer layer of skin an allergen \u2013 a substance that causes the immune system to respond in a way that affects the skin Contact dermatitis caused by irritants is more common, causing up to 8 in every 10 cases. Read more about the causes of contact dermatitis. Signs and symptoms Contact dermatitis is a type of eczema that causes the skin to become red, blistered, dry, scaly and cracked. This reaction will usually occur with a few hours or days of exposure to an irritant or allergen. Symptoms can affect any part of the body, but most commonly affect the hands and face. Read more about the symptoms of contact dermatitis. Seeking medical advice You should see your GP if you have persistent, recurrent or severe symptoms of contact dermatitis. They can try to identify the cause and suggest appropriate treatments. They can also refer you for further tests to confirm which specific irritant or allergen is causing your symptoms. Read more about diagnosing contact dermatitis. How contact dermatitis is treated If you can successfully avoid the irritants or allergens that trigger your symptoms, your skin will eventually clear up. However, as this isn't always possible, you may also be advised to use: emollients \u2013 moisturisers applied to the skin to stop it becoming dry topical corticosteroids \u2013 ointments and creams applied to the skin that can help relieve severe symptoms oral corticosteroids \u2013 tablets that can help relieve widespread symptoms With treatment, most people with contact dermatitis can expect their symptoms to improve, and some cases will resolve completely. Read more about treating contact dermatitis and preventing contact dermatitis.  Other types of eczema Eczema is the name for a group of skin conditions that cause dry, irritated skin. Other types of eczema include: atopic eczema (also called atopic dermatitis) \u2013 the most common type of eczema; it often runs in families and is linked to other conditions, such as asthma and hay fever discoid eczema \u2013 a type of eczema that occurs in circular or oval patches on the skin varicose eczema \u2013 a type of eczema that most often affects the lower legs and is caused by problems with the flow of blood through the leg veins Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 21\/10\/2014 Next review due: 21\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 181 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atopic eczema Discoid eczema Emollients Topical corticosteroids Varicose eczema External links British Association of Dermatologists: contact dermatitis BSACI: allergy clinics National Eczema Society: treatments Eczema: 7 ways to stop scratching Eczema can be tough for a child to cope with, but parents can help reduce the impact with these tips NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Contraception","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/contraception-guide","content":"Contraception - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Your contraception guide Welcome to the contraception guide \"Where can I get contraception?\" \"Which method of contraception suits me?\" \"I'm under 16 \u2013 can I get contraception?\" Whatever questions you have about getting and using contraception, this guide can help. It aims to give practical information to everyone who wants to know more about contraception, including teenagers; women in their 20s, 30s and 40s; and anyone with a question about the method they use or are thinking about using. You can find out about the 15 methods that are available on the NHS, together with where to get them and how to decide which method might work best for you. Finding your way around If you're viewing on a computer screen, use the big green tabs at the top of the page to see a full menu for each section of the contraception guide. If you can't find what you are after, try the search box at the top of the page \u2013 it covers everything on the NHS Choices site. If you're viewing this on a mobile device, click the blue tab called \"Sections\" at the top of the page, and you'll see a list of all the topics covered in this guide. When you are on a page you like, be sure to check out the useful links and videos on the right-hand side. Popular subjects and pages You can start by finding out about the methods of contraception you can choose from, including how they work, who can use them and possible side effects. These methods are:  caps combined pill condoms (female) condoms (male) contraceptive implant contraceptive injection contraceptive patch diaphragms intrauterine device (IUD) intrauterine system (IUS) natural family planning progestogen-only pill vaginal ring There are two permanent methods of contraception: female sterilisation male sterilisation (vasectomy) You can also find out about: how effective contraception is, and how effective emergency contraception is Deciding which method suits you Which method works best for you depends on a number of factors, including your age, whether you smoke, your medical and family history, and any medication you're taking. Find out what you need to think about in Which method suits me? Where you can get contraception and emergency contraception Contraception is free on the NHS. Find out where to get contraception, and search by postcode to find: GPs near you  sexual health clinics near you  pharmacies near you  You can also find out where to get emergency contraception \u2013 the \"morning after pill\" or the IUD (coil). Common questions about contraception Get answers to some common questions about getting and using contraception, including: what to do if you're on the pill and you're sick or have diarrhoea using contraception after having a baby when your periods will come back after stopping the pill whether you can get a sterilisation reversal on the NHS Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2015 Next review due: 02\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 286 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 160  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Hospital Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Contraception clinics Find out what information and services you can expect from a contraception clinic External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for under 25s NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Combined contraceptive pill","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/combined-contraceptive-pill.aspx","content":"The combined pill - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Combined pill The combined oral contraceptive pill is usually just called \"the pill\". It contains artificial versions of the female hormones oestrogen and progesterone, which women produce naturally in their ovaries. At a glance: the combined pill   How the combined pill works   What to do if you miss a pill   Who can use the combined pill   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks of the combined pill A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the combined pill. The hormones in the pill prevent your ovaries from releasing an egg (ovulating). They also make it difficult for sperm to reach an egg, or for an egg to implant itself in the lining of the womb. The pill is usually taken to prevent pregnancy, but can also be used to treat painful periods, heavy periods, premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and endometriosis. At a glance: the combined pill When taken correctly, the pill is over 99% effective at preventing pregnancy. This means that fewer than one woman in 100 who use the combined pill as contraception will get pregnant in one year. You need to take the pill every day for 21 days, then stop for seven days, and during this week you have a period-type bleed. You start taking the pill again after seven days. You need to take the pill at the same time every day. You could get pregnant if you don't do this, or if you miss a pill, or vomit or have severe diarrhoea. If you have heavy periods or painful periods, the combined pill can help. Minor side effects include mood swings, breast tenderness and headaches. There is no evidence that the pill makes women gain weight. There's a very low risk of serious side effects, such as blood clots and cervical cancer. The combined pill is not suitable for women over 35 who smoke, or women with certain medical conditions. The pill does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs), so using a condom as well will help to protect you against STIs. How the combined pill works How it prevents pregnancy Monophasic 21-day pills Phasic 21-day pills Every day (ED) pills How to take 21-day pills How to take every day pills Starting the combined pill Taking pill packs back-to-back How it prevents pregnancy The pill prevents the ovaries from releasing an egg each month (ovulation). It also: thickens the mucus in the neck of the womb, so it is harder for sperm to penetrate the womb and reach an egg thins the lining of the womb, so there is less chance of a fertilised egg implanting into the womb and being able to grow Although there are many different brands of pill, there are three main types: Monophasic 21-day pills This is the most common type. Each pill has the same amount of hormone in it. One pill is taken each day for 21 days and then no pills are taken for the next seven days. Microgynon, Brevinor and Cilest are examples of this type of pill. Phasic 21-day pills Phasic pills contain two or three sections of different coloured pills in a pack. Each section contains a different amount of hormones. One pill is taken each day for 21 days and then no pills are taken for the next seven days. Phasic pills need to be taken in the right order. Binovum and Logynon are examples of this type of pill. Every day (ED) pills You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you There are 21 active pills and seven inactive (dummy) pills in a pack. The two types of pill look different. One pill is taken each day for 28 days with no break between packets of pills. Every day pills need to be taken in the right order. Microgynon ED and Logynon ED are examples of this type of pill. Follow the instructions that come with your packet. If you have any questions about how to take the pill, ask your GP, practice nurse or pharmacist. It's important to take the pills as instructed, because missing pills or taking them at the same time as certain medicines may make them less effective. How to take 21-day pills Take your first pill from the packet marked with the correct day of the week, or the first pill of the first colour (phasic pills). Continue to take a pill at the same time each day until the pack is finished.  Stop taking pills for seven days (during these seven days you will get a bleed).  Start your next pack of pills on the eighth day, whether you are still bleeding or not. This should be the same day of the week as when you took your first pill. How to take every day pills Take the first pill from the section of the packet marked \"start\". This will be an active pill. Continue to take a pill every day, in the correct order and preferably at the same time each day, until the pack is finished (28 days).  During the seven days of taking the inactive pills, you will get a bleed. Start your next pack of pills after you have finished the first, whether you are still bleeding or not. Starting the combined pill Most women can start the pill at any time in their menstrual cycle. There is special guidance if you have just had a baby, abortion or miscarriage. You may need to use additional contraception during your first days on the pill \u2013 this depends on when in your menstrual cycle you start taking it. If you start the combined pill on the first day of your period (day one of your menstrual cycle) you will be protected from pregnancy straight away. You will not need additional contraception. If you start the pill on the fifth day of your period or before, you will still be protected from pregnancy straight away, unless you have a short menstrual cycle (your period is every 23 days or less). If you have a short menstrual cycle, you will need additional contraception, such as condoms, until you have taken the pill for seven days. If you start the pill on any other day of your cycle, you will not be protected from pregnancy straight away and will need additional contraception until you have taken the pill for seven days. Taking pill packs back-to-back For monophasic combined pills (pills all the same colour and with the same level of hormones), it is normally fine to start a new pack of pills straight after your last one \u2013 for example, if you want to delay your period for a holiday. However, avoid taking more than two packs together unless advised to by a doctor or nurse. This is because you may have breakthrough bleeding as the womb lining sheds slightly. Some women find they feel bloated if they run several packs of the pill together. What to do if you miss a pill If you miss a pill or pills, or you start a pack late, this can make the pill less effective at preventing pregnancy. The chance of getting pregnant after missing a pill or pills depends on: when the pills are missed how many pills are missed A pill is late when you have forgotten to take it at your usual time. You have missed a pill when it is more than 24 hours since the time you should have taken it. Missing one pill anywhere in your pack or starting the new pack one day late isn\u2019t a problem, as you will still be protected against pregnancy (known as having contraceptive cover). However, missing two or more pills, or starting the pack two or more days late (more than 48 hours late) may affect your contraceptive cover. In particular, if you make the seven-day pill-free break longer by forgetting two or more pills, your ovaries might release an egg and there is a risk of getting pregnant. This is because your ovaries are not getting any effect from the pill during the seven-day break. If you miss a pill, follow the advice below. If you are not sure what to do, continue to take your pill and use another method of contraception, such as condoms, and seek advice as soon as possible. If you have missed one pill, anywhere in the pack: take the last pill you missed now, even if it means taking two pills in one day continue taking the rest of the pack as usual you don\u2019t need to use additional contraception, such as condoms take your seven-day pill-free break as normal If you have missed two or more pills (you are taking your pill more than 48 hours late) anywhere in the pack: take the last pill you missed now, even if it means taking two pills in one day leave any earlier missed pills continue taking the rest of the pack as usual and use an extra method of contraception for the next seven days you may need emergency contraception you may need to start the next pack of pills without a break (see Starting the next pack after missing two or more pills) You may need emergency contraception if you have had unprotected sex in the previous seven days and have missed two or more pills (you are taking your pill more than 48 hours late) in the first week of a pack. Get advice from your contraception clinic, doctor or pharmacist about this. You can also call NHS 111 or the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123. Starting the next pack after missing two or more pills If there are seven or more pills left in the pack after the last missed pill: finish the pack have the usual seven-day break If there are fewer than seven pills left in the pack after the last missed pill:  finish the pack and start the new one the next day, without having a break Vomiting and diarrhoea If you vomit within two hours of taking the combined pill, it may not have been fully absorbed into your bloodstream. Take another pill straight away and the next pill at your usual time. If you continue to be sick, keep using another form of contraception while you're ill and for two days after recovering. Very severe diarrhoea (six to eight watery stools in 24 hours) may also mean that the pill doesn't work properly. Keep taking your pill as normal, but use additional contraception, such as condoms, while you have diarrhoea and for two days after recovering. Speak to your GP or contraception nurse or call NHS 111 for more information, or if your sickness or diarrhoea continues. Who can use the combined pill If there are no medical reasons why you cannot take the pill and you do not smoke, you can take the pill until your menopause. However, the pill is not suitable for all women. To find out whether the pill is right for you, talk to your GP, practice nurse or pharmacist. You should not take the pill if you: are pregnant smoke and are 35 or older stopped smoking less than a year ago and are 35 or older are very overweight take certain medicines (ask your GP about this) You should also not take the pill if you have (or have had): thrombosis (a blood clot) a heart abnormality or heart disease, including high blood pressure severe migraines, especially with aura (warning symptoms) breast cancer disease of the gallbladder or liver diabetes with complications or diabetes for the past 20 years After having a baby If you have just had a baby and are not breastfeeding, you can start the pill on day 21 after the birth. You will be protected against pregnancy straight away. If you start the pill later than 21 days after giving birth, you will need additional contraception (such as condoms) for the next seven days. If you are breastfeeding a baby less than six months old, taking the pill can reduce your flow of milk. It is recommended that you use a different method of contraception until you stop breastfeeding. After a miscarriage or abortion If you have had a miscarriage or abortion, you can start the pill up to five days after this and you will be protected from pregnancy straight away. If you start the pill more than five days after the miscarriage or abortion, you'll need to use additional contraception until you have taken the pill for seven days. Advantages and disadvantages Some advantages of the pill include: it does not interrupt sex it usually makes your bleeds regular, lighter and less painful it reduces your risk of cancer of the ovaries, womb and colon it can reduce symptoms of PMS it can sometimes reduce acne it may protect against pelvic inflammatory disease it may reduce the risk of fibroids, ovarian cysts and non-cancerous breast disease Some disadvantages of the pill include: it can cause temporary side effects at first, such as headaches, nausea, breast tenderness and mood swings \u2013 if these do not go after a few months, it may help to change to a different pill it can increase your blood pressure it does not protect you against sexually transmitted infections breakthrough bleeding and spotting is common in the first few months of using the pill it has been linked to an increased risk of some serious health conditions, such as thrombosis (blood clots) and breast cancer The combined pill with other medicines Some medicines interact with the combined pill and it doesn't work properly. Some interactions are listed on this page, but it is not a complete list. If you want to check your medicines are safe to take with the combined pill, you can: ask your GP, practice nurse or pharmacist read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine Antibiotics The antibiotics rifampicin and rifabutin (which can be used to treat illnesses including tuberculosis and meningitis) can reduce the effectiveness of the combined pill. Other antibiotics do not have this effect. If you are prescribed rifampicin or rifabutin, you may need additional contraception (such as condoms) while taking the antibiotic. Speak to your doctor or nurse for advice. Epilepsy and HIV medicines, and St John's wort The combined pill can interact with medicines called enzyme inducers. These speed up the breakdown of progestogen by your liver, reducing the effectiveness of the pill. Examples of enzyme inducers are: the epilepsy drugs carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone and topiramate St John's wort (a herbal remedy) antiretroviral medicines used to treat HIV (research suggests that interactions between these medicines and the progestogen-only pill can affect the safety and effectiveness of both) Your GP or nurse may advise you to use an alternative or additional form of contraception while taking any of these medicines. Risks of taking the combined pill There are some risks associated with using the combined contraceptive pill. However, these risks are small and, for most women, the benefits of the pill outweigh the risks. Blood clots The oestrogen in the pill may cause your blood to clot more readily. If a blood clot develops, it could cause deep vein thrombosis (clot in your leg), pulmonary embolus (clot in your lung), stroke or heart attack. The risk of getting a blood clot is very small, but your doctor will check if you have certain risk factors that make you more vulnerable before prescribing the pill. The pill can be taken with caution if you have one of the risk factors below, but you should not take it if you have two or more risk factors. These include: being 35 years old or over being a smoker or having quit smoking in the past year being very overweight (in women with a BMI of 35 or over, the risks of using the pill usually outweigh the benefits) having migraines (you should not take the pill if you have severe or regular migraine attacks, especially if you get aura or a warning sign before an attack) having high blood pressure having had a blood clot or stroke in the past having a close relative who had a blood clot when they were younger than 45 being immobile for a long time \u2013 for example, in a wheelchair or with a leg in plaster Cancer Research is ongoing into the link between breast cancer and the pill. Research suggests that users of all types of hormonal contraception have a slightly higher chance of being diagnosed with breast cancer compared with women who do not use them. However, 10 years after you stop taking the pill, your risk of breast cancer goes back to normal. Research has also suggested a link between the pill and the risk of developing cervical cancer and a rare form of liver cancer. However, the pill does offer some protection against developing endometrium (lining of the womb) cancer, ovarian cancer and colon cancer. Where you can get the combined pill Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people's services (call the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching by postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.   Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/12\/2014 Next review due: 29\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 538 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 372  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Which method suits me?  What should I do if I miss a pill? Where can I get contraception? External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information FPA: My Contraception Tool Will they tell my parents? Confidentiality and sexual health services for young people, including contraception, STIs and abortion services Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Taken an extra pill What to do if you've taken an extra contraceptive pill by accident Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens Progestogen-only pill The progestogen-only pill uses fewer hormones than the combined pill, which can be key for women who can't use oestrogen NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Condoms","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/male-condoms.aspx","content":"Male condoms - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Condoms A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the condom. At a glance: condoms   How a condom works   Who can use condoms   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks of condoms    Where to get condoms There are two types of condoms: male condoms, which are worn on the penis, and female condoms, which are worn inside the vagina. This page is about male condoms, where you can get them and how they work. Male condoms are made from very thin latex (rubber), polyisoprene or polyurethane, and are designed to stop a man's semen from coming into contact with his sexual partner. When condoms are used correctly during vaginal sex, they help to protect against pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections (STIs). When used correctly during anal and oral sex, they help to protect against STIs. Condoms are the only contraception that protect against pregnancy and STIs. At a glance: condoms If used correctly every time you have sex, male condoms are 98% effective. This means that two out of 100 women using male condoms as contraception will become pregnant in one year. You can get free condoms from contraception clinics, sexual health clinics and some GP surgeries. Oil-based products, such as moisturiser, lotion and Vaseline, can make latex and polyisoprene condoms less effective, but they are safe to use with condoms made from polyurethane. Water-based lubricant, available in pharmacies and sexual health clinics, is safe to use with all condoms. It's possible for a condom to slip off during sex. If this happens, you may need emergency contraception, and to get checked for STIs. Condoms need to be stored in places that aren't too hot or cold, and away from sharp or rough surfaces that could tear them or wear them away. Putting on a condom can be an enjoyable part of sex, and doesn't have to feel like an interruption. If you're sensitive to latex, you can use polyurethane or polyisoprene condoms instead.  A condom must not be used more than once. Use a new one each time you have sex. Condoms have a use-by date on the packaging. Don't use out-of-date condoms. Always buy condoms that have the BSI kite mark and the CE mark on the packet. This means that they've been tested to high safety standards. Condoms that don't have the BSI kite mark and CE mark won't meet these standards, so don't use them. How a condom works Condoms are a barrier method of contraception. They stop sperm from reaching an egg by creating a physical barrier between them. Condoms can also protect against STIs if used correctly during vaginal, anal and oral sex. It's important that the man's penis does not make contact with the woman's vagina before a condom has been put on. This is because semen can come out of the penis before a man has fully ejaculated (come). If this happens, or if semen leaks into the vagina while using a condom, seek advice about emergency contraception from your GP or contraception clinic. You should also consider having an STI test. How to use a condom  Take the condom out of the packet, taking care not to tear it with jewellery or fingernails \u2013 do not open the packet with your teeth. Place the condom over the tip of the erect penis. If there's a teat on the end of the condom, use your thumb and forefinger to squeeze the air out of it. Gently roll the condom down to the base of the penis. If the condom won't roll down, you're probably holding it the wrong way round \u2013 if this happens, throw the condom away because it may have sperm on it, and try again with a new one. After sex, withdraw the penis while it's still erect \u2013 hold the condom onto the base of the penis while you do this.  Remove the condom from the penis, being careful not to spill any semen. Throw the condom away in a bin, not down the toilet. Make sure the man's penis does not touch his partner's genital area again. If you have sex again, use a new condom. Condoms with spermicide Some male condoms come with spermicide on them. Spermicide is a chemical that kills sperm. These condoms are slowly being phased out, as research has found that a spermicide called nonoxynol 9 does not protect against STIs such as chlamydia and HIV, and may even increase the risk of infection. It is best to avoid using spermicide-lubricated condoms, or spermicide as an additional lubricant. Who can use condoms Most people can safely use condoms. There are many different varieties and brands of male condom, and it's up to you and your partner which type of condom you use. However, condoms may not be the most suitable method of contraception for everyone. Some men and women are sensitive to the chemicals in latex condoms. If this is a problem, polyurethane or polyisoprene condoms have a lower risk of causing an allergic reaction. Men who have difficulty keeping an erection may not be able to use male condoms, as the penis must be erect to prevent semen leaking from the condom, or the condom slipping off.  Advantages and disadvantages of condoms It is important to consider which form of contraception is right for you and your partner. Take care to use condoms correctly, and consider using other forms of contraception for extra protection. Advantages When used correctly and consistently, condoms are a reliable method of preventing pregnancy.  They help to protect both partners from STIs, including chlamydia, gonorrhoea and HIV. You only need to use them when you have sex \u2013 they do not need advance preparation and are suitable for unplanned sex. In most cases, there are no medical side effects from using condoms. Male condoms are easy to get hold of and come in a variety of shapes, sizes and flavours. Disadvantages Some couples find that using condoms interrupts sex \u2013 to get around this, try to make using a condom part of foreplay.  Condoms are very strong, but may split or tear if not used properly. Some people may be allergic to latex, plastic or spermicides \u2013 you can get condoms that are less likely to cause an allergic reaction. When using a male condom, the man has to pull out after he has ejaculated and before the penis goes soft, holding the condom firmly in place. If male condoms aren't used properly, they can slip off or split. If this happens, practise putting them on so that you get used to using them properly.   Can anything make condoms less effective? Sperm can sometimes get into the vagina during sex, even when using a condom. This may happen if: the penis touches the area around the vagina before a condom is put on the condom splits or comes off the condom gets damaged by sharp fingernails or jewellery you use oil-based lubricants, such as lotion, baby oil or petroleum jelly, with latex or polyisoprene condoms \u2013 this damages the condom  you are using medication for conditions like thrush, such as creams, pessaries or suppositories \u2013 this can damage latex and polyisoprene condoms and stop them working properly If you think that sperm has entered the vagina, talk to your GP or staff at a contraception clinic about emergency contraception and the risk of STIs. As well as condoms, you can use other forms of contraception, such as the contraceptive pill, for extra protection against pregnancy. However, other forms of contraception will not protect you against STIs. You will still be at risk of STIs if the condom breaks. Using lubricant Condoms come ready lubricated to make them easier to use, but you may also like to use additional lubricant, or lube. This is particularly advised for anal sex, to reduce the chance of the condom splitting. Any kind of lubricant can be used with condoms that are not made of latex. However, if you are using latex or polyisoprene condoms, do not use oil-based lubricants, such as: body oil or lotion petroleum jelly or creams (such as Vaseline) This is because they can damage the condom and make it more likely to split. If a condom splits or comes off If the condom splits or comes off, you can use emergency contraception to help prevent pregnancy. This is for emergencies only and shouldn't be used as a regular form of contraception. Depending on the type of pill, you need to take the emergency contraceptive pill up to 72 hours or up to 120 hours (five days) after unprotected sex. The intrauterine device (IUD) can be used as emergency contraception up to five days after sex. If you have been at risk of pregnancy, you have also been at risk of STIs. You should have a check-up at: a GP surgery a contraception clinic a sexual health clinic or genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic a young person's clinic Risks For most people, there are no serious risks associated with using condoms, although some people are allergic to latex condoms. You can get condoms that are less likely to cause an allergic reaction. Where to get condoms Everyone can get condoms for free, even if they are under 16. They are available from: contraception clinics sexual health or GUM (genitourinary medicine) clinics some GP surgeries  some young people's services Find sexual health services near you You can also buy condoms from: pharmacies supermarkets websites mail-order catalogues vending machines in some public toilets some petrol stations If you buy condoms online, make sure that you buy them from a pharmacist or other legitimate retailer. Always choose condoms that carry the BSI kite mark and the European CE mark as a sign of quality assurance. This means they have been tested to the required safety standards. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with young people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 13\/01\/2015 Next review due: 13\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 280 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Female condoms A female condom is worn inside the vagina to stop sperm entering the womb Condom tips Do you use condoms safely? Find out key facts, such as the 30-minute condom rule Related articles How do I use a condom? How does a female condom work? My partner won't use condoms External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Services near you Find and compare services Services Contraception information and advice Emergency contraception Free condoms GP Hospital Information and support for unplanned pregnancy Pharmacy Pregnancy testing Relationship counselling Sexual health information and support Sexual health services for young people STI testing and treatment Unwanted pregnancy Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose Contraception after a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after having a baby. Find out when to start contraception Sexually transmitted infections Find out about the different types of infections you can catch from having unprotected sex or genital contact Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Contraceptive injections","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/contraceptive-injection.aspx","content":"The contraceptive injection - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: The contraceptive injection A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the injection. At a glance: the contraceptive injection   How it works   Who can use it   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks   Where you can get it There are three types of contraceptive injections in the UK: Depo-Provera, which lasts for 12 weeks, Sayana Press, which lasts for 13 weeks, and Noristerat, which lasts for eight weeks. The most popular is Depo-Provera. Noristerat is usually used for only short periods of time \u2013 for example, if your partner is waiting for a vasectomy. The injection contains progestogen. This thickens the mucus in the cervix, stopping sperm reaching an egg. It also thins the womb lining and, in some, prevents the release of an egg. At a glance: the contraceptive injection If used correctly, the contraceptive injection is more than 99% effective. This means that less than one woman in 100 who use the injection will become pregnant in a year. The injection lasts for eight, 12 or 13 weeks (depending on the type), so you don't have to think about contraception every day or every time you have sex. It can be useful for women who might forget to take the contraceptive pill every day. It can be useful for women who can't use contraception that contains oestrogen. It's not affected by medication. The contraceptive injection may provide some protection against cancer of the womb and pelvic inflammatory disease. Side effects can include weight gain, headaches, mood swings, breast tenderness and irregular bleeding. The injection can't be removed from your body, so if you have side effects they'll last as long as the injection and for some time afterwards. Your periods may become more irregular or longer, or stop altogether (amenorrhoea). Treatment is available if your bleeding is heavy or longer than normal \u2013 talk to your doctor or nurse about this. It can take up to one year for your fertility to return to normal after the injection wears off, so it may not be suitable if you want to have a baby in the near future. Using Depo-Provera affects your natural oestrogen levels, which can cause thinning of the bones.  The injection does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using condoms as well as the injection, you'll help to protect yourself against STIs. How the injection works You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you The contraceptive injections Depo-Provera and Noristerat are usually given into a muscle in your bottom, although sometimes may be given in a muscle in your upper arm. Sayana Press is given under the skin (subcutaneously) rather than into a muscle, in the abdomen or thigh. The contraceptive injection works in the same way as the implant. It steadily releases the hormone progestogen into your bloodstream. Progestogen is similar to the natural hormone progesterone, which is released by a woman's ovaries during her period. The continuous release of progestogen: stops a woman releasing an egg every month (ovulation)  thickens the mucus from the cervix (neck of the womb), making it difficult for sperm to pass through to the womb and reach an unfertilised egg  makes the lining of the womb thinner, so that it is unable to support a fertilised egg The injection can be given at any time during your menstrual cycle, as long as you and your doctor are reasonably sure you are not pregnant. When it starts to work If you have the injection during the first five days of your cycle, you will be immediately protected against becoming pregnant.  If you have the injection on any other day of your cycle, you will not be protected against pregnancy for up to seven days. Use condoms or another method of contraception during this time. After giving birth You can have the contraceptive injection at any time after you have given birth, if you are not breastfeeding. If you are breastfeeding, the injection will usually be given after six weeks, although it may be given earlier if necessary. If you start injections on or before day 21 after giving birth, you will be immediately protected against becoming pregnant. If you start injections after day 21, you will need to use additional contraception for the following seven days. Heavy and irregular bleeding is more likely to occur if you have the contraceptive injection during the first few weeks after giving birth. It is safe to use contraceptive injections while you are breastfeeding. After a miscarriage or abortion You can have the injection immediately after a miscarriage or abortion, and you will be protected against pregnancy straight away. If you have the injection more than five days after a miscarriage or abortion, you'll need to use additional contraception for seven days. Who can use the injection? Most women can be given the contraceptive injection. It may not be suitable if you: think you might be pregnant  want to keep having regular periods  have bleeding in between periods or after sex  have arterial disease or a history of heart disease or stroke have a blood clot in a blood vessel (thrombosis)  have liver disease  have migraines  have breast cancer or have had it in the past  have diabetes with complications  have cirrhosis or liver tumours are at risk of osteoporosis   Advantages and disadvantages of the injection The main advantages of the contraceptive injection are: each injection lasts for either eight, 12 or 13 weeks  the injection does not interrupt sex  the injection is an option if you cannot use oestrogen-based contraception, such as the combined pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring you do not have to remember to take a pill every day the injection is safe to use while you are breastfeeding  the injection is not affected by other medicines the injection may reduce heavy, painful periods and help with premenstrual symptoms for some women the injection offers some protection from pelvic inflammatory disease (the mucus from the cervix may stop bacteria entering the womb) and may also give some protection against cancer of the womb Using the contraceptive injection may have some disadvantages, which you should consider carefully before deciding on the right method of contraception for you. These are as follows: Disrupted periods Your periods may change significantly during the first year of using the injection. They will usually become irregular and may be very heavy, or shorter and lighter, or stop altogether. This may settle down after the first year, but may continue as long as the injected progestogen remains in your body. It can take a while for your periods and natural fertility to return after you stop using the injection. It takes around eight to 12 weeks for injected progestogen to leave the body, but you may have to wait longer for your periods to return to normal if you are trying to get pregnant. Until you are ovulating regularly each month, it can be difficult to work out when you are at your most fertile. In some cases, it can take three months to a year for your periods to return to normal. Weight gain You may put on weight when you use the contraceptive injection, particulaly if you are under 18 years old and are overweight with a BMI (body mass index) of 30 or over.    Other side effects that some women report are: headaches acne tender breasts changes in mood loss of sex drive Depo-Provera, oestrogen and bone risk Using Depo-Provera affects your natural oestrogen levels, which can cause thinning of the bones, but it does not increase your risk of breaking a bone. This isn't a problem for most women, because the bone replaces itself when you stop the injection, and it doesn't appear to cause any long-term problems. Thinning of the bones may be a problem for women who already have an increased risk of developing osteoporosis (for example, because they have low oestrogen, or a family history of osteoporosis). It may also be a concern for women under 18, because the body is still making bone at this age. Women under 18 may use Depo-Provera, but only after careful evaluation by a doctor. Will other medicines affect the injection? No \u2013 the contraceptive injection is not affected by other medication. Risks There is a small risk of infection at the site of the injection. In very rare cases, some people may have an allergic reaction to the injection. Where you can get it Most types of contraception are available free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics  sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching your postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Page last reviewed: 12\/01\/2015 Next review due: 12\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 546 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 267  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Contraceptive implant  When can I use contraception after having a baby?  External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Does contraceptive jab make HIV more likely? \"Contraceptive injections moderately increase a woman's risk of becoming infected with HIV,\" The Guardian reports. The headline was prompted by a study looking at whether the use of contraceptive injections increases the risk of contracting HIV Antibiotics and contraception Some methods of contraception can be affected by certain antibiotics. Find out which ones NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Contraceptive patch","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/contraceptive-patch.aspx","content":"The contraceptive patch - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: The contraceptive patch A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart, or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the patch. At a glance: the patch   How it works   Who can use it   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks   Where you can get it  The contraceptive patch is a sticky patch, a bit like a nicotine patch, measuring 5x5cm. It delivers hormones into your body through your skin. In the UK, the patch's brand name is Evra. It contains the same hormones as the combined pill, and it works in the same way. This means that it prevents ovulation (the release of an egg); it thickens cervical mucus, which makes it more difficult for sperm to travel through the cervix; and it thins the womb lining, making it less likely that a fertilised egg will implant there. At a glance: facts about the patch When used correctly, the patch is more than 99% effective at preventing pregnancy. Each patch lasts for one week. You change the patch every week for three weeks, then have a week off without a patch. You don't need to think about it every day, and it's still effective if you vomit or have diarrhoea. You can wear the patch in the bath, in the swimming pool and while playing sports.   If you have heavy or painful periods, the patch can help. The patch can increase blood pressure, and some women get temporary side effects, such as headaches.   Some women develop a blood clot when using the patch, but this is rare. The patch may protect against ovarian cancer, womb cancer and colon cancer. The patch may not be suitable for women who smoke and who are 35 or over, or who weigh 90kg (14 stone) or more. The patch does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs), so using a condom as well will help to protect you against STIs. How it works How you use the patch  When the patch starts to work What to do if the patch falls off What to do if you forget to take the patch off  Bleeding in the patch-free week  How you use the patch You can use the contraceptive patch on most areas of your body, as long as the skin is clean, dry and not very hairy.  You apply a new patch once a week (every seven days) for three weeks, and then stop using the patch for seven days. This is known as your patch-free week. During your patch-free week you will get a withdrawal bleed, like a period, although this may not always happen. After seven patch-free days, you apply a new patch and start the four-week cycle again. Start your new cycle even if you are still bleeding. You should not stick the patch on: sore or irritated skin  anywhere it may get rubbed off by tight clothing  your breasts When you first start using the patch, you can vary the position every time you use a new patch to reduce your risk of irritation. When the patch starts to work The licence for the patch states that if you start using the patch on the first day of your period, it starts working straight away. This means you can have sex without getting pregnant. The Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare guidance states that if you start using the patch in the first five days of your menstrual cycle, you will be protected and won't need to use additional contraception. If you start using it on any other day, you need to use an additional form of contraception, such as condoms, for the first seven days. You can talk to your doctor or nurse for more information about when the patch will start to work, and whether you need to use additional contraception. What to do if the patch falls off The contraceptive patch is very sticky and should stay on. It should not come off after a shower, bath, hot tub, sauna or swim, or after exercise. If the patch does fall off, what you need to do depends on how long it has been off, and how many days you had a patch on before it came off. If the patch has been off for less than 48 hours: stick your patch back on as soon as possible (if it is still sticky) if it is not sticky, replace it with a new patch (do not try to hold the old patch in place with a plaster or bandage) continue to use your patch as normal and change your patch on your normal change day If the patch has been off for less than 48 hours before you replace it, you will still be protected against pregnancy as long as the patch was on properly for seven days before the patch came off. If this is the case, you do not need to use additional contraception. If you have had a patch on for six days or less before it falls off, you may not be protected against pregnancy and should use additional contraception, such as condoms, for seven days. If the patch has been off for 48 hours or more, or you're not sure how long it has been off: apply a new patch as soon as possible and start a new patch cycle (this will now be day one of your new cycle)  use another form of contraception, such as condoms, for the next seven days If you had unprotected sex in the previous few days, you may need emergency contraception. See your GP, nurse or local sexual health (GUM) clinic if you are concerned. What to do if you forget to take the patch off If you forget to take the patch off after week one or two, what you need to do depends on how long you have forgotten it. If it has been on for: Less than 48 hours longer than it should have been (eight or nine days in total) \u2013 take off the old patch and put on a new one. Continue to use your patch as normal, changing it on your normal change day. You don\u2019t need to use any additional contraception and you are protected against pregnancy.  48 hours or more longer than it should have been (10 days or more in total) \u2013 start a whole new patch cycle by applying a new patch as soon as possible. This is now week one of the patch cycle and you will have a new day of the week as your start day and change day. Use another method of contraception, such as condoms, for the next seven days. Ask your doctor or nurse for advice if you have had sex in the previous few days and were not using a condom, as you may need emergency contraception. If you forget to take the patch off after week three, take the patch off as soon as possible and start your patch-free break. Start a new patch on your usual start day, even if you are bleeding. This means that you will not have a full week of patch-free days. You will be protected against pregnancy and do not need to use any additional contraception. You may or may not bleed on the patch-free days. What to do if you forget to put a patch on after the patch-free week There is no specific research on what happens if the patch-free week is longer than seven days. The patch works in a similar way to the vaginal ring and the combined pill, and advice for extending the patch-free week is based on what is known about the vaginal ring and combined pill. If you forget to put on a patch at the end of the patch-free week, put a new one on as soon as you remember. If you put the patch on 48 hours late or less (so the patch-free interval has been nine days or less), you will still be protected against pregnancy, as long as you wore the patch correctly before the patch-free interval. If you put the patch on more than 48 hours late, so the interval has been 10 days or more, you may not be protected against pregnancy and need to use additional contraception, such as condoms, for seven days. Ask your doctor or nurse for advice if you have had sex in the patch-free interval, as you may need emergency contraception.   Bleeding in the patch-free week Some women do not always have a bleed in their patch-free week. This is nothing to worry about if you have used the patch properly and have not taken any medication that could affect it. See your GP or nurse for advice if you are worried, or do a pregnancy test to check if you are pregnant. If you miss more than two bleeds, get medical advice. Who can use the patch You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you The contraceptive patch is not suitable for everyone. If you are thinking of using it, your doctor or nurse will need to ask you about your health and your family\u2019s medical history, to make sure the patch is suitable for you. It is very important to tell them about any illnesses or operations you have had, or medications you are currently taking. Conditions and circumstances that may mean you should not use the patch include:  you are pregnant or think you may be pregnant  you are breastfeeding  you smoke and are 35 or over you are 35 or over and stopped smoking less than a year ago  you are very overweight you take certain medicines, such as some antibiotics, St John\u2019s Wort or medicines used to treat epilepsy, tuberculosis (TB) or HIV You will also not be able to use the patch if you have (or have had) any of the following conditions:  thrombosis (blood clots) in a vein or artery a heart problem or a disease affecting your blood circulatory system (including high blood pressure) migraine with aura (warning signs) breast cancer disease of the liver or gallbladder  diabetes with complications, or diabetes for more than 20 years Advantages and disadvantages of the patch If it is used properly, the contraceptive patch is more than 99% effective in stopping you from getting pregnant. This means that if 100 women use the patch according to the instructions, fewer than one will get pregnant in a year. Other advantages of the patch are: it is very easy to use and does not interrupt sex unlike the combined oral contraceptive pill, you do not have to think about it every day \u2013 you only have to remember to change the patch once a week the hormones from the contraceptive patch do not need to be absorbed by the stomach, so it is just as effective even if you vomit or have diarrhoea like the pill, it tends to make your periods more regular, lighter and less painful it can help with premenstrual symptoms it may reduce the risk of ovarian, womb and bowel cancer it may reduce the risk of fibroids, ovarian cysts and non-cancerous breast disease Some women may find that the contraceptive patch has some disadvantages and may wish to use a different form of contraception. Some potential disadvantages of the patch are that: it may be visible it can cause skin irritation, itching and soreness it does not protect you against STIs, so you may need to use condoms as well some women get mild temporary side effects when they first start using the patch, such as headaches, nausea (sickness), breast tenderness and mood changes; these side effects usually settle down after a few months bleeding between periods (breakthrough bleeding) and spotting (very light, irregular bleeding) is common in the first few cycles of using the patch; this is nothing to worry about if you are using the patch properly, and you will still be protected against pregnancy Some medicines can make the patch less effective. If you are prescribed new medicine or are buying an over-the-counter medicine, ask the doctor or pharmacist for advice. You may need to use an extra form of contraception while you are taking the medicine, and for 28 days afterwards. Risks of using the patch There is a very small risk of some serious side effects when you use a hormonal contraceptive, such as the contraceptive patch or combined pill. Blood clots The patch slightly increases your chance of developing a blood clot, which can block a vein (venous thrombosis) or an artery (arterial thrombosis, which may lead to a heart attack or stroke). If you have had a blood clot before, do not use the patch. Your risk of blood clots is higher during the first year of using the patch. Your risk is also higher if: you smoke you are very overweight  you are immobile (unable to move) or use a wheelchair you have severe varicose veins  a close family member had a venous thrombosis before they were 45 years old The risk of arterial thrombosis is greatest if: you smoke you are diabetic you have high blood pressure (hypertension) you are very overweight  you regularly have migraines with aura (warning signs) a close family member had a heart attack or stroke before they were 45 Cancer Current research suggests that people who use hormonal contraception, such as the contraceptive patch, are at a slightly increased risk of being diagnosed with breast cancer compared with people who do not use hormonal contraception. However, further research is needed to provide more definitive evidence. Research also suggests there is a small increase in your risk of developing cervical cancer with the long-term use of oestrogen and progestogen hormonal contraception. For most women, the benefits of the patch outweigh the risks. However, discuss all risks and benefits with your GP or nurse before starting to use the patch. You will not be allowed to use the patch if you are considered to be at a higher risk of serious side effects. Where you can get it Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. When you first get the contraceptive patch you will be given a three-month supply, to see how you get on with it. If there are no problems, you can be prescribed the patch for six months to a year. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics  sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people\u2019s services (call the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching by postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer), as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 30\/12\/2014 Next review due: 30\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 207 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Will antibiotics affect my contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? Contraception after having a baby  External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for young people Services near you Find and compare services Services Contraception information and advice GP Sexual health information and support Sexual health services Sexual health services for young people Unplanned pregnancy information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Diaphragms and caps","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/contraceptive-diaphragm.aspx","content":"Contraceptive diaphragm - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Contraceptive diaphragm A woman can get pregnant if a man's sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart, or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the diaphragm.   At a glance: facts about the diaphragm   How it works   Who can use it   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks   Where you can get it   A contraceptive diaphragm is inserted into the vagina before sex, and it covers the cervix so that sperm can't get into the womb (uterus). You need to use spermicide with it (spermicides kill sperm). The diaphragm must be left in place for at least six hours after sex. After that time, you take out the diaphragm and wash it (they're reusable). Diaphragms come in different sizes \u2013 you must be fitted for the correct size by a trained doctor or nurse. At a glance: contraceptive diaphragm When used correctly with spermicide, a diaphragm is 92-96% effective at preventing pregnancy \u2013 this means that between four and eight women out of every 100 who use a diaphragm as contraception will become pregnant within a year. There are no serious health risks. You only have to think about it when you have sex. You can put a diaphragm in several hours before you have sex. It can take time to learn how to use it. Some women develop cystitis (a bladder infection) when they use a diaphragm. Your doctor or nurse can check the size \u2013 switching to a smaller size may help. If you lose or gain more than 3kg (7lbs) in weight, or have a baby, miscarriage or abortion, you may need to be fitted with a new diaphragm. By using condoms as well as a diaphragm, you'll help to protect yourself against sexually transmitted infections (STIs).   How the contraceptive diaphragm works Inserting a diaphragm  Removing a diaphragm Looking after your diaphragm You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you A diaphragm (like a cap) is a barrier method of contraception. It fits inside your vagina and prevents sperm from passing through the cervix (the entrance of your womb). Diaphragms are soft, thin domes made of latex (rubber) or silicone, and come in different shapes and sizes. To be effective in preventing pregnancy, diaphragms need to be used in combination with spermicide, which is a chemical that kills sperm. You only have to use a diaphragm when you have sex, but you must leave it in for at least six hours after the last time you had sex. You can leave it in for longer than this, but do not take it out before. When you first start using a diaphragm, a doctor or nurse will examine you and advise on the correct size or shape to suit you. They will show you how to put in and take out a diaphragm, and also how to use the spermicide, which must be applied every time you use the diaphragm. A diaphragm provides only limited protection against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). If you're at a high risk of getting an STI \u2013 for example, you or your partner has more than one sexual partner \u2013 you may be advised to use another form of contraception.  Inserting a diaphragm Your doctor or nurse will show you how to put in a diaphragm. Diaphragms come with instructions and are all inserted in a similar way: With clean hands, put a small amount of spermicide on each side of the diaphragm (also putting a little spermicide on the rim may make the diaphragm easier to put in). Put your index finger on top of the diaphragm and squeeze it between your thumb and other fingers. Slide the diaphragm into your vagina, upwards. This should ensure that the diaphragm covers your cervix. Always check that your cervix is covered \u2013 it feels like a lump, a bit like the end of your nose. If your cervix is not covered, take the diaphragm out by hooking your finger under the rim or loop (if there is one) and pulling downwards, then try again. Some women squat while they put their diaphragm in; others lie down or stand with one foot up on a chair \u2013 use the position that's easiest for you. You can insert a diaphragm up to three hours before you have sex \u2013 after this time, you will need to take it out and put some more spermicide on it. You may be fitted with a temporary diaphragm by your doctor or nurse. This is for you to practise with at home. It allows you to learn how to use it properly, see how it feels and find out if the method is suitable for you. During this time, you are not protected against pregnancy and need to use additional contraception, such as condoms, when you have sex. When you go back for a follow-up appointment with your doctor or nurse, wear the diaphragm so they can check that it is the right size and you have put it in properly. When they are happy that you can use a diaphragm properly, they will give you one to use as contraception. Removing a diaphragm A diaphragm can be easily removed by gently hooking your finger under its rim, loop or strap and pulling it downwards and out. You must leave all types of diaphragm in place for at least six hours after the last time you had sex. You can leave them in for longer than this, but do not leave them in for longer than the recommended time of 30 hours (including the minimum six).  Looking after your diaphragm  After using, you can wash your diaphragm with warm water and mild unperfumed soap. Rinse it thoroughly, then leave it to dry. You will be given a small container for it, which you should keep in a cool, dry place. Never boil a diaphragm. Do not use disinfectant, detergent, oil-based products or talcum powder to keep it clean, as these products can damage it.  Your diaphragm may become discoloured over time, but this does not make it less effective. Always check your diaphragm or cap for any signs of damage before using it.  You can visit your GP or nurse when you want to replace your diaphragm. Most women can use the same diaphragm for a year before they need to replace it. You may need to get a different size diaphragm if you gain or lose more than 3kg (7lb) in weight, or if you have a baby, miscarriage or abortion. Who can use a diaphragm? Most women are able to use a diaphragm. However, they may not be suitable for you if you:  have an unusually shaped or positioned cervix (entrance to the womb), or if you cannot reach your cervix  have weakened vaginal muscles (possibly as a result of giving birth) that cannot hold a diaphragm in place have a sensitivity or an allergy to latex or the chemicals in spermicide  have ever had toxic shock syndrome (a rare but life-threatening bacterial infection)  have repeated urinary tract infections (infection of the urinary system, such as the urethra, bladder or kidneys)  currently have a vaginal infection (wait until your infection clears before using a diaphragm or cap)  are not comfortable touching your vagina  have a high risk of getting an STI \u2013 for example, if you have multiple sexual partners Research shows that spermicides which contain the chemical nonoxynol-9 do not protect against STIs and may even increase your risk of getting an infection. A diaphragm may be less effective if: it is damaged \u2013 for example, it is torn or has holes  it is not the right size for you you use it without spermicide  you do not use extra spermicide with your diaphragm every time you have more sex  you remove it too soon (less than six hours after the last time you had sex) you use oil-based products, such as baby lotion, bath oils, moisturiser or some vaginal medicines (for example, pessaries) with latex diaphragms \u2013 these can damage the latex If any of these things happen, or you have had sex without contraception, you may need to use emergency contraception. You can use a diaphragm after having a baby, but you may need a different size. It is recommended that you wait at least six weeks after giving birth before using a diaphragm. You can use a diaphragm after a miscarriage or abortion, but you may need a different size. Advantages and disadvantages A diaphragm has the following advantages: You only need to use a diaphragm when you want to have sex. You can put it in at a convenient time before having sex (but do not forget to use extra spermicide if you have it in for more than three hours). There are no serious associated health risks or side effects. You are in control of your contraception. A diaphragm has the following disadvantages: It is not as effective as other types of contraception. It only provides limited protection against STIs. It can take time to learn how to use it. Putting it in can interrupt sex. Cystitis (bladder infection) can be a problem for some women who use a diaphragm. Latex and spermicide can cause irritation in some women and their sexual partners. Risks  There are no health risks associated with using a contraceptive diaphragm. Where you can get a diaphragm Most types of contraception are free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics  some genitourinary (GUM) clinics sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people's services (call the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching by postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacists won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/01\/2015 Next review due: 09\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 52 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Sexual health information and support Sexual health services Sexual health services for young people STI testing and treatment Unplanned pregnancy information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Types of contraception Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Expert advice for teenage girls about what types of contraception are available and where they can find the right kind to suit them. Media last reviewed: 27\/05\/2015 Next review due: 27\/05\/2017 Contraceptive cap This small silicone cap is used in the vagina to prevent pregnancy Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose Good sex How to have a fulfilling sex life, including sex tips, and talking to your partner NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Emergency contraceptive pill","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/emergency-contraception.aspx","content":"Emergency contraception: morning after pill and IUD - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD) Emergency contraception can prevent pregnancy after unprotected sex or if your contraceptive method has failed \u2013 for example, a condom has split or you've missed a pill. There are two types:  the emergency contraceptive pill (sometimes called the morning after pill) the IUD (intrauterine device, or coil) At a glance: emergency contraception   The emergency pill    The IUD as emergency contraception   Where to get emergency contraception   Contraception for the future There are two kinds of emergency contraceptive pill. Levonelle has to be taken within 72 hours (three days) of sex, and ellaOne has to be taken within 120 hours (five days) of sex. Both pills work by preventing or delaying ovulation (release of an egg). The IUD can be inserted into your uterus up to five days after unprotected sex, or up to five days after the earliest time you could have ovulated. It may stop an egg from being fertilised or implanting in your womb. Emergency contraception does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). At a glance: facts about emergency contraception Both types of emergency contraception are effective at preventing pregnancy if they are used soon after unprotected sex. Less than 1% of women who use the IUD get pregnant, whereas pregnancies after the emergency contraceptive pill are not as rare. It\u2019s thought that ellaOne is more effective than Levonelle. The sooner you take Levonelle or ellaOne, the more effective it will be. Levonelle or ellaOne can make you feel sick, dizzy or tired, or give you a headache, tender breasts or abdominal pain. Levonelle or ellaOne can make your period earlier or later than usual. If you\u2019re sick (vomit) within two hours of taking Levonelle, or three hours of taking ellaOne, seek medical advice as you will need to take another dose or have an IUD fitted. If you use the IUD as emergency contraception, it can be left in as your regular contraceptive method. If you use the IUD as a regular method of contraception, it can make your periods longer, heavier or more painful. You may feel some discomfort when the IUD is put in \u2013 painkillers can help to relieve this. There are no serious side effects of using emergency contraception. Emergency contraception does not cause an abortion. The emergency pill How the emergency pill works How effective the emergency pill is at preventing pregnancy How it affects your period  Who can use the emergency pill  During breastfeeding If you're already using the pill, patch, vaginal ring or injection Side effects of the emergency pill The emergency pill and other medicines Can I get the emergency pill in advance? How the emergency pill works Levonelle Levonelle contains levonorgestrel, a synthetic version of the natural hormone progesterone. In a woman\u2019s body, progesterone plays a role in ovulation and preparing the uterus for accepting a fertilised egg. It\u2019s not known exactly how Levonelle works, but it\u2019s thought to work primarily by preventing or delaying ovulation. It does not interfere with your regular method of contraception. ellaOne ellaOne contains ulipristal acetate, which stops progesterone working normally. It prevents pregnancy mainly by preventing or delaying ovulation.` Levonelle and ellaOne do not continue to protect you against pregnancy. This means that if you have unprotected sex at any time after taking the emergency pill you can become pregnant. Even if you are starting or continuing another method of hormonal contraception, it may not be effective immediately. You will need to use condoms or avoid sex until the contraception is working effectively. The time it takes for contraception to become effective depends on the emergency contraceptive pill and the method of hormonal contraception being started. Your doctor or nurse will tell you when you can start hormonal contraception and how long you will need to take additional precautions to prevent an unintended pregnancy. Levonelle and ellaOne are not intended to be used as a regular form of contraception. However, you can use emergency contraception more than once in a menstrual cycle if necessary. How effective is the emergency pill at preventing pregnancy? You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services some pharmacies  Find a clinic near you It can be difficult to know how many pregnancies the emergency pill prevents, because there is no way to know for sure how many women would have got pregnant if they did not take it. A study published in 2010 showed that of 1,696 women who received the emergency pill within 72 hours of sex, 37 became pregnant (1,659 did not). Of 203 women who took the emergency pill between 72 and 120 hours after unprotected sex, there were three pregnancies. Find out more about the research on the effectiveness of both emergency contraception pills. However, it's important to remember that the sooner you take emergency contraception after sex, the more effective it will be. How it affects your period After taking the emergency contraceptive pill, most women will have a normal period at the expected time. However, you may have your period later or earlier than normal. If your period is more than seven days late, or is unusually light or short, contact your GP as soon as possible to check for pregnancy. Who can use the emergency pill? Most women can use the emergency contraceptive pill. This includes women who cannot usually use hormonal contraception, such as the combined pill and contraceptive patch. Girls aged under 16 years old can also use the emergency contraceptive pill. Levonelle The WHO does not identify any medical condition that would mean a woman shouldn\u2019t use Levonelle. ellaOne The manufacturer of ellaOne advises that it should not be used by women who:  are allergic to any of the components of the drug have severe asthma that is treated with glucocorticoids (steroid) tablets have certain rare hereditary problems with lactose metabolism ellaOne may not be effective in women who are taking liver enzyme-inducing medication. For more information, read The emergency pill and other medicines. Breastfeeding Levonelle Levonelle can be taken while breastfeeding. Although small amounts of the hormones contained in the pill may pass into your breast milk, it is not thought to be harmful to your baby. ellaOne The safety of ellaOne during breastfeeding is not yet known. The manufacturer recommends that you do not breastfeed for one week after taking this pill. If you are already using the pill, patch, vaginal ring or contraceptive injection You may need to take the emergency pill if you: forgot to take some of your regular contraceptive pills, or did not use your contraceptive patch or vaginal ring correctly, or were late having your contraceptive implant or contraceptive injection If you have taken Levonelle, then you should:  take your next contraceptive pill, apply a new patch or insert a new ring within 12 hours of taking the emergency pill You should then continue taking your regular contraceptive pill as normal. You will need to use additional contraception, such as condoms, for: the next seven days if you use the patch, ring, combined pill (except Qlaira), implant or injection nine days for the combined pill Qlaira  the next two days if you use the progestogen-only pill If you have taken ellaOne, you will need to wait at least five days before taking your next contraceptive pill, applying a new patch or inserting a new ring. You should then use additional contraception, such as condoms, while waiting to restart your contraceptive method and then for: the next seven days if you use the patch, ring, combined pill (except Qlaira), implant or injection nine days for the combined pill Qlaira  the next two days if you use the progestogen-only pill What are the side effects of using the emergency pill? Taking the emergency contraceptive pill has not been shown to cause any serious or long-term health problems. However, it can sometimes have side effects. Common side effects include:  abdominal (tummy) pain headache irregular menstrual bleeding (spotting or heavy bleeding) before your next period is due feeling sick tiredness Less common side effects include: breast tenderness dizziness headache vomiting (seek medical advice if you vomit within two hours of taking Levonelle, or three hours of taking ellaOne, as you will need to take another dose or have an IUD fitted) If you are concerned about any symptoms after taking the emergency contraceptive pill, contact your GP or speak to a nurse at a sexual health clinic. You should talk to a doctor or nurse if:  you think you might be pregnant your next period is more than seven days late your period is shorter or lighter than usual you have any sudden or unusual pain in your lower abdomen (this could be a sign of an ectopic pregnancy, where a fertilised egg implants outside the womb \u2013 this is rare but serious, and needs immediate medical attention)  The emergency pill and other medicines The emergency contraceptive pill may interact with other medicines. These include:  the herbal medicine St John\u2019s Wort some medicines used to treat epilepsy some medicines used to treat HIV some medicines used to treat tuberculosis (TB) medication such as omeprazole (an antacid) to make your stomach less acidic ellaOne cannot be used if you are already taking one of these medicines, as it may not be effective. Levonelle may still be used, but the dose may need to be increased \u2013 your doctor or pharmacist can advise on this. There should be no interaction between the emergency pill and most antibiotics. Two enzyme-inducing antibiotics (called rifampicin and rifabutin), used to treat or prevent meningitis or TB, may affect ellaOne while they\u2019re being taken and for 28 days afterwards. If you want to check that your medicines are safe to take with the emergency contraceptive pill, ask your GP or a pharmacist. You should also read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicines.  Can I get the emergency contraceptive pill in advance? You may be able to get the emergency contraceptive pill in advance of having unprotected sex if: you are worried about your contraceptive method failing you are going on holiday you cannot get hold of emergency contraception easily Ask your GP or nurse for further information on getting advance emergency contraception. The IUD as emergency contraception An intrauterine device (IUD) How the IUD works How effective the IUD is at preventing pregnancy Who can use the IUD During pregnancy and breastfeeding Side effects of using the IUD  The IUD and other medicines How the IUD works The intrauterine device (IUD) is a small, T-shaped contraceptive device made from plastic and copper. It\u2019s inserted into the uterus by a trained health professional. It may prevent an egg from implanting in your womb or being fertilised. If you\u2019ve had unprotected sex, the IUD can be inserted up to five days afterwards, or up to five days after the earliest time you could have ovulated, to prevent pregnancy. It\u2019s more effective at preventing pregnancy than the emergency pill, and it does not interact with any other medication. You can also choose to have the IUD left in as an ongoing method of contraception. How effective is the IUD at preventing pregnancy? There are several types of IUD. Newer ones have more copper and are more than 99% effective. Fewer than two women in 100 who use a newer IUD over five years will get pregnant. IUDs with less copper in them are less effective than this, but are still effective. The IUD is more effective than the emergency pill at preventing pregnancy after unprotected sex. Who can use the IUD? Most women can use an IUD, including women who have never been pregnant and those who are HIV positive. Your GP or clinician will ask about your medical history to check if an IUD is suitable for you. You should not use an IUD if you have: an untreated STI or a pelvic infection certain abnormalities of the womb or cervix any unexplained bleeding from your vagina \u2013 for example, between periods or after sex Women who have a heart condition should consult their GP or cardiologist before having an IUD fitted. Pregnancy and breastfeeding The IUD should not be inserted if there is a risk that you may already be pregnant. The IUD can be used safely if you\u2019re breastfeeding, but the risk of complications during insertion is slightly higher. What are the side effects of the IUD Complications after having an IUD fitted are rare, but can include pain, infection, damage to the womb or expulsion (the IUD coming out of your womb). If you use the IUD as an ongoing method of regular contraception, it may make your periods longer, heavier or more painful. The IUD and other medicines The emergency IUD will not react with any other medication. Where can I get emergency contraception? You can get the emergency contraceptive pill and the IUD for free from: a GP surgery that provides contraception (some GP surgeries may not provide the IUD) a contraception clinic  a sexual health clinic (find sexual health services near you) some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics some young people's clinics (call 0300 123 7123) You can also get the emergency contraceptive pill free from: most pharmacies (find pharmacies near you)  some NHS walk-in centres and minor injuries units some Accident & Emergency departments The doctor or nurse you see may ask for the following information: when you have had unprotected sex in your current menstrual cycle the date of the first day of your last period and the usual length of your cycle details of any contraceptive failure (such as how many pills you may have missed, and when) if you've used any medications that may affect your contraception You can buy the emergency contraceptive pill from most pharmacies if you're aged 16 or over and from some organisations such as bpas or Marie Stopes. The cost varies, but it will be around £30 to £35. Contraception for the future If you're not using a regular method of contraception, you might consider doing so in order to lower the risk of unintended pregnancy. Long-acting reversible contraception (LARC) offers the most reliable protection against pregnancy, and you don't have to think about it every day or each time you have sex. LARC methods are the: injection implant IUS IUD     Page last reviewed: 13\/01\/2015 Next review due: 13\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 126 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Sexually transmitted infections What services do contraception clinics offer? External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Find emergency contraception services Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Missed pill (combined pill) What to do if you're on the combined pill and miss one or more pills Missed pill (progestogen-only) What to do if you're on the progestogen-only pill and you miss one or more Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Pregnancy tests: advice for young people Find out where to buy a pregnancy test or get one for free, and how to use it Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy How effective is emergency contraception? Find out how well the emergency pill and the IUD work at preventing pregnancy after unprotected sex NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Female sterilisation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/female-sterilisation.aspx","content":"Female sterilisation - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Female sterilisation A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is female sterilisation. At a glance: female sterilisation   How it works   Who can have it done   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks of female sterilisation   Where you can get it Female sterilisation is usually carried out under general anaesthetic, but can be carried out under local anaesthetic, depending on the method used. The surgery involves blocking or sealing the fallopian tubes, which link the ovaries to the womb (uterus).  This prevents the woman\u2019s eggs from reaching sperm and becoming fertilised. Eggs will still be released from the ovaries as normal, but they will be absorbed naturally into the woman's body.   At a glance: facts about female sterilisation In most cases, female sterilisation is more than 99% effective, and only one woman in 200 will become pregnant in her lifetime after having it done.  You don't have to think about it every day, or every time you have sex, so it doesn't interrupt or affect your sex life.  Sterilisation can be carried out at any stage of the menstrual cycle. It won't affect hormone levels. You'll still have periods after being sterilised. You will need to use contraception until the operation is done and until your next period or for three months afterwards (depending on the type of sterilisation). As with any surgery, there's a small risk of complications. These include internal bleeding, infection or damage to other organs.  There's a small risk that the operation won't work. Blocked tubes can rejoin immediately or years later.  If the operation fails, this may increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy (when a fertilised egg implants outside the womb, usually in a fallopian tube).  The sterilisation operation is difficult to reverse. Female sterilisation doesn't protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs), so always use a condom to protect yourself and your partner against them. How female sterilisation works Female sterilisation works by preventing eggs from travelling down the fallopian tubes. This means a woman's eggs cannot meet sperm, and fertilisation cannot happen. How female sterilisation is carried out  Before the operation Recovering after the operation How female sterilisation is carried out There are two main types of female sterilisation: when your fallopian tubes are blocked \u2013 for example, with clips or rings (tubal occlusion)   when implants are used to block your fallopian tubes (hysteroscopic sterilisation, or HS)  It can be a fairly minor operation, with many women returning home the same day. Sterilisation is usually carried out using tubal occlusion. Tubal occlusion First, your surgeon will need to access and examine your fallopian tubes, using either laparoscopy or mini-laparotomy. A laparoscopy is the most common method of accessing the fallopian tubes. The surgeon makes a small cut in your abdominal wall near your belly button and inserts a laparoscope. A laparoscope is a small flexible tube that contains a tiny light and camera. The camera relays images of the inside of your body to a television monitor. This allows the surgeon to see your fallopian tubes clearly. A mini-laparotomy involves a small incision, usually less than 5cm (2 inches), just above the pubic hairline. Your surgeon can then access your fallopian tubes through this incision. A laparoscopy is usually the preferred option because it is faster. However, a mini-laparotomy may be recommended for women who: have had recent abdominal or pelvic surgery are obese (have a body mass index of 30 or over)  have a history of pelvic inflammatory disease (a bacterial infection that can affect the womb and fallopian tubes) Blocking the tubes The fallopian tubes can be blocked using one of the following methods: applying clips \u2013 plastic or titanium clamps are closed over the fallopian tubes  applying rings \u2013 a small loop of the fallopian tube is pulled through a silicone ring, then clamped shut  tying and cutting the tube \u2013 this destroys 3-4cm (1-1.5 inches) of the tube Hysteroscopic sterilisation (fallopian implants) You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has published guidance about hysteroscopic sterilisation. In the UK, the brand name of the hysteroscopic sterilisation technique is Essure. The procedure doesn't require cuts to be made in your abdomen so general anaesthetic is not required. Though you may be given a painkiller and \/or a local anaesthetic. A narrow tube with a telescope at the end, called a hysteroscope, is passed through your vagina and cervix. A guidewire is used to insert a tiny piece of titanium metal (called a microinsert) into the hysteroscope, then into each of your fallopian tubes. This means that the surgeon does not need to cut into your body. The implant causes the fallopian tube to form scar tissue around it, which eventually blocks the tube. You should carry on using contraception until an imaging test has confirmed that your fallopian tubes are blocked. This can be done with one or more of the following:  a hysterosalpingogram (HSG) \u2013 a type of X-ray that is taken after a special dye has been injected to show up any blockages in your fallopian tubes  a hysterosalpingo-contrast-sonography (HyCoSy) \u2013 a type of ultrasound scan involving injecting dye into your fallopian tubes The manufacturer of Essure now advises that ultrasound scan is an additional option for checking placement of the implants 3 months after the sterilisation procedure. If the coils of the implant are seen to be in the correct position tubal occlusion can be assumed Removing the tubes (salpingectomy) If blocking the fallopian tubes has been unsuccessful, the tubes may be completely removed. Removal of the tubes is called salpingectomy. Before the operation Your GP will strongly recommend counselling before referring you for sterilisation. Ideally, this should be with you and your partner if appropriate and acceptable. If possible, you should both agree to the procedure, but it is not a legal requirement to get your partner\u2019s permission. Counselling will give you a chance to talk about the operation in detail, and talk about any doubts, worries or questions that you might have. Your GP does have the right to refuse to carry out the procedure or refuse to refer you for the procedure if they do not believe that it is in your best interests. If this is the case, you may have to pay to have a sterilisation privately. If you decide to be sterilised, your GP will usually refer you to a specialist for treatment. This will usually be a gynaecologist at your nearest NHS hospital. A gynaecologist is a specialist in the female reproductive system. If you choose to have a sterilisation, you will be asked to use contraception until the day of the operation, and to continue using it:  until your next period if you are having your fallopian tubes blocked (tubal occlusion)   for around three months if you are having fallopian implants (hysteroscopic sterilisation) Sterilisation can be performed at any stage in your menstrual cycle. Before you have the operation, you will be given a pregnancy test to make sure that you are not pregnant. It is vital to know this because once the surgeon blocks your fallopian tubes, there is a high risk that any pregnancy will become ectopic (when the fertilised egg grows outside the womb, usually in the fallopian tubes). An ectopic pregnancy can be life-threatening because it can cause severe internal bleeding. Recovering after the operation Once you have recovered from the anaesthetic, passed urine and had something to eat, you will be allowed home. If you leave hospital within hours of the operation, ask a relative or friend to pick you up, or take a taxi. The healthcare professionals treating you in hospital will tell you what to expect and how to care for yourself after surgery. They may give you a contact number to call if you have any problems or any questions. If you have had a general anaesthetic, do not drive a car for 48 hours afterwards. This is because even if you feel fine, your reaction times and judgement may not be back to normal. How you will feel It is normal to feel unwell and a little uncomfortable for a few days if you have had a general anaesthetic, and you may have to rest for a couple of days. Depending on your general health and your job, you can normally return to work five days after tubal occlusion. However, you should avoid heavy lifting for about a week. You may have some slight vaginal bleeding. Use a sanitary towel rather than a tampon until this has gone. You may also feel some pain, similar to period pain. You may be prescribed painkillers for this. If the pain or bleeding gets worse, seek medical attention. Caring for your wound If you had tubal occlusion to block your fallopian tubes, you will have a wound with stitches where the surgeon made an incision (cut) into your stomach. Some stitches are dissolvable and disappear on their own, and some will need to be removed. If your stitches need removing, you will be given a follow-up appointment for this. If there is a dressing over your wound, you can normally remove this the day after your operation. After this, you will be able to have a bath or shower as normal. Having sex Your sex drive and enjoyment of sex will not be affected. You can have sex as soon as it is comfortable to do so after the operation. If you had tubal occlusion, you will need to use contraception until your first period to protect yourself from pregnancy. If you had hysteroscopic sterilisation, you will need to use another form of contraception for around three months after surgery. After scans have confirmed that the implants are in the correct position, you will no longer need contraception. Sterilisation will not protect you from STIs, so continue to use barrier contraception such as condoms if you are unsure of your partner's sexual health. Who can have it done? Almost any woman can be sterilised. However, sterilisation should only be considered by women who do not want any more children, or do not want children at all. Once you are sterilised it is very difficult to reverse the process, so it's important to consider the other options available before making your decision. Sterilisation reversal is not usually available on the NHS. Surgeons are more willing to perform sterilisation when women are over 30 years old and have had children, although some younger women who have never had a baby choose it. Advantages and disadvantages of female sterilisation Advantages female sterilisation can be more than 99% effective at preventing pregnancy tubal occlusion (blocking the fallopian tubes) and removal of the tubes (salpingectomy) should be effective immediately \u2013 however, doctors strongly recommend that you continue to use contraception until your next period hysteroscopic sterilisation is usually effective after around three months \u2013 research collected by NICE found that the fallopian tubes were blocked after three months in 96% of sterilised women Other advantages of female sterilisation are that: there are rarely any long-term effects on your sexual health it will not affect your sex drive it will not affect the spontaneity of sexual intercourse or interfere with sex (as other forms of contraception can) it will not affect your hormone levels Disadvantages female sterilisation does not protect you against STIs, so you should still use a condom if you are unsure about your partner's sexual health  it is very difficult to reverse a tubal occlusion \u2013 this involves removing the blocked part of the fallopian tube and rejoining the ends, and reversal operations are rarely funded by the NHS a 2015 US study found that around 1 in 50 women who had a hysteroscopic sterilisation required further surgery due to complications such as persistent pain  Risks with tubal occlusion, there is a very small risk of complications, including internal bleeding and infection or damage to other organs it is possible for sterilisation to fail \u2013 the fallopian tubes can rejoin and make you fertile again, although this is rare (about one in 200 women become pregnant in their lifetime after being sterilised) if you do get pregnant after the operation, there is an increased risk that it will be an ectopic pregnancy (when the fertilised egg grows outside the womb, usually in the fallopian tubes) If you miss a period, take a pregnancy test immediately. If the pregnancy test is positive, you must see your GP so that you can be referred for a scan to check if the pregnancy is inside or outside your womb. With hysteroscopic sterilisation, there is a small risk of pregnancy even after your tubes have been blocked. Research collected by NICE has shown that possible complications after fallopian implants can include: pain after the operation \u2013 in one study, nearly eight out of 10 women reported pain afterwards the implants being inserted incorrectly \u2013 this affected two out of 100 women   bleeding after the operation \u2013 many women had light bleeding after the operation, and nearly a third had bleeding for three days Where to get contraception Most types of contraception are available free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. You can get contraception, and information and advice about contraception, at: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraceptive clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics  sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic.  Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.   Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/01\/2015 Next review due: 05\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 340 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 205  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Sexually transmitted infections Vasectomy (male sterilisation) External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for young people Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Services near you Find and compare services Services Contraception information and advice Genito-Urinary Medicine GP Sexual health services Vasectomy Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history Contraception after a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after having a baby. Find out when to start contraception NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find sexual health services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=SexualHealthService","content":"Find Sexual health information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Sexual health information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Intrauterine device (IUD)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/iud-coil.aspx","content":"IUD coil - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: IUD (intrauterine device) A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping eggs being produced. One method of contraception is the intrauterine device, or IUD (sometimes called a coil). At a glance: facts about the IUD   How the IUD works   Who can use the IUD   Advantages and disadvantages of the IUD   Risks of the IUD   Where you can get an IUD An IUD is a small T-shaped plastic and copper device that\u2019s inserted into your womb (uterus) by a specially trained doctor or nurse.  The IUD works by stopping the sperm and egg from surviving in the womb or fallopian tubes. It may also prevent a fertilised egg from implanting in the womb. The IUD is a long-acting reversible contraceptive (LARC) method. This means that once it's in place, you don't have to think about it each day or each time you have sex. There are several types and sizes of IUD. You can use an IUD whether or not you've had children.   At a glance: facts about the IUD There are different types of IUD, some with more copper than others. IUDs with more copper are more than 99% effective. This means that fewer than one in 100 women who use an IUD will get pregnant in one year. IUDs with less copper will be less effective.  An IUD works as soon as it's put in, and lasts for five to 10 years, depending on the type. It can be put in at any time during your menstrual cycle, as long as you're not pregnant. It can be removed at any time by a specially trained doctor or nurse and you'll quickly return to normal levels of fertility. Changes to your periods (for example, being heavier, longer or more painful) are common in the first three to six months after an IUD is put in, but they're likely to settle down after this. You might get spotting or bleeding between periods.  There's a very small chance of infection within 20 days of the IUD being fitted.  There's a risk that your body may expel the IUD. If you get pregnant, there's an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy (when the egg implants outside the womb). But because you're unlikely to get pregnant, the overall risk of ectopic pregnancy is lower than in women who don't use contraception.  Having the IUD put in can be uncomfortable. Ask the doctor or nurse about pain relief. An IUD may not be suitable for you if you've had previous pelvic infections. The IUD does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using condoms as well as the IUD, you'll help to protect yourself against STIs. How the IUD works How it prevents pregnancy Having an IUD fitted How to tell whether an IUD is still in place Removing an IUD How it prevents pregnancy The IUD is similar to the IUS (intrauterine system) but works in a different way. Instead of releasing the hormone progestogen like the IUS, the IUD releases copper. Copper changes the make-up of the fluids in the womb and fallopian tubes, stopping sperm surviving there. IUDs may also stop fertilised eggs from implanting in the womb. There are types and sizes of IUD to suit different women. IUDs need to be fitted by a trained doctor or nurse at your GP surgery, local contraception clinic or sexual health clinic. An IUD can stay in the womb for five to 10 years, depending on the type. If you're 40 or over when you have an IUD fitted, it can be left in until you reach the menopause or until you no longer need contraception. Having an IUD fitted An IUD can be fitted at any time during your menstrual cycle, as long as you are not pregnant. You'll be protected against pregnancy straight away. Before you have an IUD fitted, you will have an internal examination to find out the size and position of your womb. This is to make sure that the IUD can be put in the correct place. You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you You may also be tested for infections, such as STIs. It's best to do this before an IUD is fitted so that you can have treatment (if you need it) before the IUD is put in. Sometimes, you may be given antibiotics at the same time as the IUD is fitted. It takes about 15 to 20 minutes to insert an IUD. The vagina is held open, like it is during a cervical screening (smear) test, and the IUD is inserted through the cervix and into the womb. The fitting process can be uncomfortable and sometimes painful. You may get cramps afterwards. You can ask for a local anaesthetic or painkillers before having the IUD fitted. An anaesthetic injection itself can be painful, so many women have the procedure without. You may get pain and bleeding for a few days after having an IUD fitted. Discuss this with your GP or nurse beforehand.   The IUD needs to be checked by a doctor after three to six weeks. Speak to your doctor or nurse if you have any problems before or after this first check or if you want the IUD removed. Speak to your doctor or nurse if you or your partner are at risk of getting an STI. This is because STIs can lead to an infection in the pelvis. See your GP or go back to the clinic where your IUD was fitted as soon as you can if you: have pain in your lower abdomen have a high temperature have a smelly discharge These may mean you have an infection. How to tell whether an IUD is still in place An IUD has two thin threads that hang down a little way from your womb into the top of your vagina. The doctor or nurse who fits your IUD will teach you how to feel for these threads and check that it is still in place. Check your IUD is in place a few times in the first month, and then after each period or at regular intervals.  It's very unlikely that your IUD will come out, but if you can't feel the threads, or if you think the IUD has moved, you may not be fully protected against getting pregnant. See your doctor or nurse straight away and use an extra method of contraception, such as condoms, until your IUD has been checked. If you've had sex recently, you may need to use emergency contraception. Your partner shouldn't be able to feel your IUD during sex. If he can feel the threads, get your doctor or nurse to check that your IUD is in place. They may be able to cut the threads to a shorter length. If you feel any pain during sex, go for a check-up. Removing an IUD An IUD can be removed at any time by a trained doctor or nurse. If you're not going to have another IUD put in and you don't want to get pregnant, use another method (such as condoms) for seven days before you have the IUD removed. This is to stop sperm getting into your body. Sperm can live for up to seven days in the body and could make you pregnant once the IUD is removed. As soon as an IUD is taken out, your normal fertility should return.  Who can use an IUD Most women can use an IUD. This includes women who have never been pregnant and those who are HIV positive. Your doctor or nurse will ask about your medical history to check if an IUD is the most suitable form of contraception for you. You should not use an IUD if you have: an untreated STI or a pelvic infection  problems with your womb or cervix  any unexplained bleeding from your vagina \u2013 for example, between periods or after sex Women who have had an ectopic pregnancy or recent abortion, or who have an artificial heart valve, must consult their GP or clinician before having an IUD fitted. You should not be fitted with an IUD if there's a chance that you are already pregnant or if you or your partner are at risk of catching STIs. If you or your partner are unsure, go to your GP or a sexual health clinic to be tested. Using an IUD after giving birth An IUD can usually be fitted four to six weeks after giving birth (vaginal or caesarean). You'll need to use alternative contraception from three weeks (21 days) after the birth until the IUD is fitted. In some cases, an IUD can be fitted within 48 hours of giving birth. An IUD is safe to use when you're breastfeeding and it won't affect your milk supply. Using an IUD after a miscarriage or abortion An IUD can be fitted straight away or within 48 hours after an abortion or miscarriage by an experienced doctor or nurse, as long as you were pregnant for less than 24 weeks. If you were pregnant for more than 24 weeks, you may have to wait a few weeks before having an IUD fitted.  Advantages and disadvantages of the IUD Although an IUD is an effective method of contraception, there are some things to consider before having one fitted. Advantages of the IUD Most women can use an IUD, including women who have never been pregnant. Once an IUD is fitted, it works straight away and lasts for up to 10 years or until it's removed. It doesn't interrupt sex. It can be used if you're breastfeeding. Your normal fertility returns as soon as the IUD is taken out It's not affected by other medicines. There's no evidence that having an IUD fitted will increase the risk of cancer of the cervix, endometrial cancer (cancer of the lining of the womb) or ovarian cancer. Some women experience changes in mood and libido, but these changes are very small. There is no evidence that the IUD affects weight. Disadvantages of the IUD Your periods may become heavier, longer or more painful, though this may improve after a few months.  An IUD doesn't protect against STIs, so you may have to use condoms as well. If you get an STI while you have an IUD, it could lead to a pelvic infection if not treated. The most common reasons that women stop using an IUD are vaginal bleeding and pain. Risks of the IUD Complications after having an IUD fitted are rare. Most will appear within the first year after fitting. Damage to the womb In fewer than one in 1,000 cases, an IUD can perforate (make a hole in) the womb or neck of the womb (cervix) when it's put in. This can cause pain in the lower abdomen, but doesn't usually cause any other symptoms. If the doctor or nurse fitting your IUD is experienced, the risk of this is very low. If perforation occurs, you may need surgery to remove the IUD. Contact your GP straight away if you feel a lot of pain after having an IUD fitted as perforations should be treated immediately. Pelvic infections Pelvic infections can occur in the first 20 days after the IUD is fitted. The risk of infection is very small. Fewer than one in 100 women who are at low risk of STIs will get a pelvic infection. Rejection Occasionally, the IUD is rejected (expelled) by the womb or can move (this is called displacement). This is more likely to happen soon after it has been fitted, although this is uncommon. Your doctor or nurse will teach you how to check that your IUD is in place. Ectopic pregnancy If the IUD fails and you become pregnant, your IUD should be removed as soon as possible if you're going to continue with the pregnancy. There's a small increased risk of ectopic pregnancy if a woman becomes pregnant while using an IUD. Where to get an IUD Most types of contraception are available free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics sexual health clinics \u2013 these offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people\u2019s services (call the sexual health line on 0300 123 7123 for details) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching your postcode or town. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacists won't tell your parents or carer, as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.   Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/01\/2015 Next review due: 12\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 663 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 378  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 131  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles What services do contraception clinics offer? Talking to your partner about sex   External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Hospital Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose IUS The IUS is a hormonal contraceptive inserted into the uterus to prevent pregnancy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Intrauterine system (IUS)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/ius-intrauterine-system.aspx","content":"IUS (intrauterine system) or hormonal coil - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: IUS (intrauterine system) A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the IUS, or intrauterine system (sometimes called the hormonal coil). At a glance: facts about the IUS   How the IUS works   Who can use the IUS   Advantages and disadvantages of the IUS   Risks of the IUS   Where to get the IUS An IUS is a small, T-shaped plastic device that is inserted into your womb (uterus) by a specially trained doctor or nurse. The IUS releases a progestogen hormone into the womb. This thickens the mucus from your cervix, making it difficult for sperm to move through and reach an egg. It also thins the womb lining so that it's less likely to accept a fertilised egg. It may also stop ovulation (the release of an egg) in some women. The IUS is a long-acting reversible contraceptive (LARC) method. It works for five years or three years, depending on the type, so you don't have to think about contraception every day or each time you have sex. Two brands of IUS are used in the UK \u2013 Mirena and Jaydess.  You can use an IUS whether or not you've had children. At a glance: facts about the IUS   It's more than 99% effective. Less than one in every 100 women who use Mirena will get pregnant in five years, and less than one in 100 who use Jaydess will get pregnant in three years. It can be taken out at any time by a specially trained doctor or nurse and your fertility quickly returns to normal. The IUS can make your periods lighter, shorter or stop altogether, so it may help women who have heavy periods or painful periods. Jaydess is less likely than Mirena to make your periods stop altogether. It can be used by women who can't use combined contraception (such as the combined pill) \u2013 for example, those who have migraines. Once the IUS is in place, you don't have to think about contraception every day or each time you have sex. Some women may experience mood swings, skin problems or breast tenderness.   There's a small risk of getting an infection after it's inserted. It can be uncomfortable when the IUS is put in, although painkillers can help with this. The IUS can be fitted at any time during your monthly menstrual cycle, as long as you're definitely not pregnant. Ideally, it should be fitted within seven days of the start of your period, because this will protect against pregnancy straight away. You should use condoms for seven days if the IUS is fitted at any other time. The IUS does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using condoms as well as the IUS, you'll help to protect yourself against STIs.   How the IUS works How it prevents pregnancy  Having an IUS fitted How to tell whether an IUS is still in place Removing an IUS How it prevents pregnancy The IUS is similar to the IUD (intrauterine device), but works in a slightly different way. Rather than releasing copper like the IUD, the IUS releases a progestogen hormone, which is similar to the natural hormone progesterone that's produced in a woman's ovaries. Progestogen thickens the mucus from the cervix (opening of the womb), making it harder for sperm to move through it and reach an egg. It also causes the womb lining to become thinner and less likely to accept a fertilised egg. In some women, the IUS also stops the ovaries from releasing an egg (ovulation), but most women will continue to ovulate. If you're 45 or older when you have the IUS fitted, it can be left until you reach menopause or you no longer need contraception. Having an IUS fitted You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you An IUS can be fitted at any stage of your menstrual cycle, as long as you are not pregnant. If it's fitted in the first seven days of your cycle, you will be protected against pregnancy straight away. If it's fitted at any other time, you need to use another method of contraception (such as condoms) for seven days after it's fitted. Before you have an IUS fitted, you will have an internal examination to determine the size and position of your womb. This is to make sure that the IUS can be positioned in the correct place. You may also be tested for any existing infections, such as STIs. It is best to do this before an IUS is fitted so that any infections can be treated. You may be given antibiotics at the same time as an IUS is fitted. It takes about 15 to 20 minutes to insert an IUS: the vagina is held open, like it is during a cervical screening (smear) test the IUS is inserted through the cervix and into the womb The fitting process can be uncomfortable or painful for some women, and you may also experience cramps afterwards. You can ask for a local anaesthetic or painkillers before having the IUS fitted. Discuss this with your GP or nurse beforehand. An anaesthetic injection itself can be painful, so many women have the procedure without one. Once an IUS is fitted, it will need to be checked by a doctor after three to six weeks to make sure everything is fine. Speak to your GP or clinician if you have any problems after this initial check or if you want the IUS removed. Also speak to your GP if you or your partner are at risk of getting an STI, as this can lead to infection in the pelvis. See your GP or go back to the clinic if you: have pain in your lower abdomen have a high temperature have smelly discharge This may mean you have an infection. How to tell if an IUS is still in place An IUS has two thin threads that hang down a little way from your womb into the top of your vagina. The GP or clinician that fits your IUS will teach you how to feel for these threads and check that the IUS is still in place. Check your IUS is in place a few times in the first month and then after each period at regular intervals. It is highly unlikely that your IUS will come out, but if you can't feel the threads or if you think the IUS has moved, you may not be fully protected against pregnancy. See your doctor or nurse straight away and use extra contraception, such as condoms, until your IUS has been checked. If you've had sex recently, you may need to use emergency contraception. Your partner shouldn't be able to feel your IUS during sex. If he can feel the threads, get your GP or clinician to check that your IUS is in place. They may be able to cut the threads a little. If you feel any pain during sex, go for a check-up with your GP or clinician. Removing an IUS Your IUS can be removed at any time by a trained doctor or nurse. If you're not going to have another IUS put in and you don't want to become pregnant, use another contraceptive method (such as condoms) for seven days before you have the IUS removed. Sperm can live for seven days in the body and could fertilise an egg once the IUS is removed. As soon as an IUS is taken out, your normal fertility should return. Who can use an IUS Most women can use an IUS, including women who have never been pregnant and those who are HIV positive. Your GP or clinician will ask about your medical history to check if an IUS is the most suitable form of contraception for you. Your family and medical history will determine whether or not you can use an IUS. For example, this method of contraception may not be suitable for you if you have: breast cancer, or have had it in the past five years cervical cancer  liver disease unexplained vaginal bleeding between periods or after sex arterial disease or history of serious heart disease or stroke an untreated STI or pelvic infection problems with your womb or cervix An IUS may not be suitable for women who have untreated STIs. A doctor will usually give you a check-up to make sure you don't have any existing infections. Using an IUS after giving birth An IUS can usually be fitted four to six weeks after giving birth (vaginal or caesarean). You'll need to use alternative contraception from three weeks (21 days) after the birth until the IUS is put in. In some cases, an IUS can be fitted within 48 hours of giving birth. It is safe to use an IUS when you're breastfeeding, and it won't affect your milk supply. Using an IUS after a miscarriage or abortion An IUS can be fitted by an experienced doctor or nurse straight after an abortion or miscarriage, as long as you were pregnant for less than 24 weeks. If you were pregnant for more than 24 weeks, you may have to wait a few weeks before an IUS can be fitted. Advantages and disadvantages of the IUS Although an IUS is an effective method of contraception, there are several things to consider before having an IUS fitted. Advantages of the IUS It works for five years (Mirena) or three years (Jaydess).  It's one of the most effective forms of contraception available in the UK. It doesn't interrupt sex. An IUS may be useful if you have heavy or painful periods because your periods usually become much lighter and shorter, and sometimes less painful \u2013 they may stop completely after the first year of use. It can be used safely if you're breastfeeding.  It's not affected by other medicines. It may be a good option if you can't take the hormone oestrogen, which is used in the combined contraceptive pill.  Your fertility will return to normal when the IUS is removed. There's no evidence that an IUS will affect your weight or that having an IUS fitted will increase the risk of cervical cancer, cancer of the uterus or ovarian cancer. Some women experience changes in mood and libido, but these changes are very small. Disadvantages of the IUS Some women won't be happy with the way that their periods may change. For example, periods may become lighter and more irregular or, in some cases, stop completely. Your periods are more likely to stop completely with Mirena than with Jaydess. Irregular bleeding and spotting are common in the first six months after having an IUS fitted. This is not harmful and usually decreases with time. Some women experience headaches, acne and breast tenderness after having the IUS fitted. An uncommon side effect of the IUS is the appearance of small fluid-filled cysts on the ovaries \u2013 these usually disappear without treatment. An IUS doesn't protect you against STIs, so you may also have to use condoms when having sex. If you get an STI while you have an IUS fitted, it could lead to pelvic infection if it's not treated. Most women who stop using an IUS do so because of vaginal bleeding and pain, although this is uncommon. Hormonal problems can also occur, but these are even less common. Risks of the IUS Complications caused by an IUS are rare and usually happen in the first six months after it has been fitted. These include: Damage to the womb In rare cases (fewer than one in 1,000 insertions) an IUS can perforate (make a hole in) the womb or neck of the womb (cervix) when it is put in. This can cause pain in the lower abdomen, but doesn't usually cause any other symptoms. If the doctor or nurse fitting your IUS is experienced, the risk of perforation is extremely low. If perforation occurs, you may need surgery to remove the IUS. Contact your GP straight away if you feel a lot of pain after having an IUS fitted. Perforations should be treated immediately. Pelvic infections Pelvic infections may occur in the first 20 days after the IUS has been inserted. The risk of infection from an IUS is extremely small (fewer than one in 100 women who are at low risk of STIs will get an infection). A GP or clinician will usually recommend an internal examination before fitting an IUS to be sure that there are no existing infections. Rejection Occasionally, the IUS is rejected (expelled) by the womb or it can move (this is called displacement). This is not common and is more likely to happen soon after it has been fitted. Your doctor or nurse will teach you how to check that your IUS is in place. Ectopic pregnancy If the IUS fails and you become pregnant, your IUS should be removed as soon as possible if you are continuing with the pregnancy. There's a small increased risk of ectopic pregnancy if a woman becomes pregnant while using an IUS. Where to get the IUS Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find sexual health services near you, including contraception clinics. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents or carer as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 31\/12\/2014 Next review due: 31\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 442 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 250  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles IUD (intrauterine device) What services do contraception clinics offer? External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Sexual health information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose Emergency contraception Emergency contraception (the pill or IUD) can be used to prevent pregnancy after unprotected sex Sexually transmitted infections Find out about the different types of infections you can catch from having unprotected sex or genital contact NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Male contraceptive pill","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/male-pill.aspx","content":"What is the male pill? Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: What is the male pill? In the past 50 years, there have been few changes in male contraception compared with the range of options available to women. Today, the only contraceptive methods available to men are: condoms \u2013 a barrier form of contraception that stops sperm reaching and fertilising an egg vasectomy \u2013 a minor surgical procedure that stops sperm being ejaculated from the penis during sex (it is usually permanent)  Some men use withdrawal to try to prevent pregnancy, when they pull their penis out of their partner's vagina before ejaculating. However, this is not a recommended method of contraception. Sperm can be released from the penis before ejaculation. Ongoing research There are many ongoing research projects into different methods of male contraception. Researchers are optimistic that a safe, effective and reversible method of male contraception will eventually become a reality, although this is still several years away.  Types of research There are two main areas of research into male contraception: hormonal contraception \u2013 where synthetic (man-made) hormones are used to temporarily stop the development of healthy sperm non-hormonal methods \u2013 where other techniques are used to prevent healthy sperm from entering a woman's vagina Hormonal contraception In fertile men, new sperm cells are constantly created in the testicles. This process is triggered by the hormone testosterone. The goal of hormonal contraception research is to find a way of temporarily blocking the effects of testosterone so testicles stop producing healthy sperm cells. However, this needs to be achieved without lowering testosterone levels to such an extent that it triggers side effects, such as a loss of sexual desire. Synthetic testosterone and other steroid combinations One way of doing this is by giving men a synthetic version of testosterone, together with a hormone called progestogen. Progestogens are synthetic versions of a female sex hormone often found in female hormonal contraceptives, such as the progestogen-only pill.  This approach stops the testes producing testosterone which, in most cases, prevents normal sperm production. However, at the same time it keeps the amount of testosterone in the blood normal, preventing side effects. This is a very effective approach, but some men still carry on producing enough sperm to cause a pregnancy. The reason why this happens is unknown, but it may be that some men carry on producing enough testosterone to continue to stimulate some sperm production. Research is now focusing on different combinations of synthetic testosterone and progestogens. Several trials in different countries are looking at the effectiveness and long-term safety of hormonal contraceptives for men, including some phase III trials. Phase III trials are the last clinical trials carried out before a medicine is given a marketing licence. An important disadvantage of using synthetic testosterone is that sperm production is suppressed at different rates in men of different ethnic origins. These differences may be due to genetic, dietary or environmental factors, but the exact reasons are unknown. Understanding the reasons may lead to new ways of providing effective contraception for all men of diverse ethnic backgrounds. Non-hormonal contraception Many of the non-hormonal methods of contraception currently being studied involve the vas deferens. The vas deferens is the tube that sperm pass through on their way to the penis. This tube is cut during a vasectomy. RISUG and the IVD   One promising avenue of research is a technique called reversible inhibition of sperm under guidance (RISUG). During this technique, a non-toxic synthetic chemical is injected into the vas deferens. The chemical reacts and blocks the vas deferens. It also kills sperm when they come into contact with it. The chemical is effective almost immediately after it is injected. The chemical stays in place until a man decides that he wants to have children. It can then be washed out using another injection which dissolves and flushes it out of the vas deferens. A variation of this technique is the intra-vas device (IVD). It involves injecting a \"plug\" into the vas deferens which can be removed later. The IVD filters out the sperm as it passes through the vas deferens.  Initial results of RISUG and IVD are promising, but further research is needed to assess the long-term effectiveness and safety of both techniques. Reasearch published in 2013 found that blocking certain proteins in the bodies of male mice rendered them infertile, but did not affect their sexual behaviour or the quality of their sperm. It prevented the sperm cells from being launched during ejaculation. When the mice's sperm was used to artificially inseminate female mice, it resulted in pregnancies and healthy baby mice. If a way can be found to block these proteins in human males, this may take research a step closer to producing a male contraceptive pill. However, the research is in the very early stages and a male pill has not been developed. You can find out more about the research into proteins, mice and sperm.   Epididymis Other research is focusing on the epididymis. This is a long, coiled tube behind the testicles that allows sperm to mature normally, which is essential for normal fertility. Attempts have been made to interfere with the way the epididymis works and the way sperm matures inside the epididymis. However, so far neither approach has been successful.  Page last reviewed: 06\/11\/2014 Next review due: 06\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 129 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Condoms Emergency contraception Sexually transmitted infections   External links Brook: for under 25s FPA: sexual health information Services near you Find and compare services Services Contraception information and advice Emergency contraception Family planning Free condoms Genito-Urinary Medicine GP Pharmacy Sexual health services Sexual health services for young people STI testing and treatment Unplanned pregnancy information and support Walk-in centre Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Progestogen only pill","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/the-pill-progestogen-only.aspx","content":"The progestogen-only pill - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: The progestogen-only pill A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the progestogen-only pill (POP). At a glance: the progestogen-only pill   How it works   Who can use it What to do if you miss a pill   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks It contains the hormone progestogen but doesn't contain oestrogen. You need to take the progestogen-only pill at or around the same time every day. The progestogen-only pill thickens the mucus in the cervix, which stops sperm reaching an egg. In can also stop ovulation, depending on the type of progestogen-only pill you take. Newer progestogen-only pills contain desogestrel. At a glance: facts about the progestogen-only pill If taken correctly, it can be more than 99% effective. This means that fewer than one woman in 100 who use the progestogen-only pill as contraception will get pregnant in one year. You take a pill every day, with no break between packs of pills. The progestogen-only pill can be used by women who can't use contraception that contains oestrogen \u2013 for example, because they have high blood pressure, previous blood clots or are overweight.  You can take the progestogen-only pill if you're over 35 and you smoke. You must take the progestogen-only pill at the same time each day \u2013 if you take it more than three hours late (or 12 hours late if you take a desogestrel pill, such as Cerazette) it may not be effective.  If you\u2019re sick (vomit) or have severe diarrhoea, the progestogen-only pill may not work.  Some medicines may affect the progestogen-only pill's effectiveness \u2013 ask your doctor for details.  Your periods may stop or become lighter, irregular or more frequent.  Side effects may include spotty skin and breast tenderness \u2013 these should clear up within a few months.  The progestogen-only pill doesn\u2019t protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using condoms as well as the progestogen-only pill, you'll help to protect yourself against STIs. How the progestogen-only pill works How it prevents pregnancy Using the progestogen-only pill Starting the first pack of pills How it prevents pregnancy The progestogen-only pill works by thickening the mucus in the neck of the womb, so it is harder for sperm to penetrate into the womb and reach an egg. Sometimes, depending on the type of progestogen-only pill, it may also prevent ovulation (the release of an egg from your ovaries each month). The desogestrel pill (12-hour pill, such as Cerazette) stops ovulation in 97% of menstrual cycles. This means that if you're using a 12-hour progestogen-only pill, you won't release an egg in 97 cycles out of 100. Using the progestogen-only pill There are two different types of progestogen-only pill: The three-hour progestogen-only pill must be taken within three hours of the same time each day. Examples are Femulen, Micronor, Norgeston and Noriday. The 12-hour progestogen-only pill (desogestrel pill, such as Cerazette) must be taken within 12 hours of the same time each day.  It is important to follow the instructions that come with your pill packet, because missing pills or taking the pill alongside other medicines can reduce its effectiveness. There are 28 pills in a pack of progestogen-only pills. You need to take one pill every day, within either three or 12 hours of the same time each day, depending on which type you are taking. There\u2019s no break between packs of pills \u2013 when you finish one pack, you start the next one the next day. Starting the first pack of pills Choose a convenient time in the day to take your first pill. Continue to take a pill at the same time each day until the pack is finished.  Start your next pack of pills the following day. There is no break between packs of pills. You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you You can start the progestogen-only pill at any time in your menstrual cycle. If you start it on day one of your menstrual cycle (the first day of your period) it will work straight away and you will be protected against pregnancy. You won\u2019t need additional contraception. If you start the progestogen-only pill on day five of your menstrual cycle or earlier (the fifth day after the start of your period or before) you will be protected from pregnancy straight away unless you have a short menstrual cycle (your period is every 23 days or less). If you have a short menstrual cycle, you will need additional contraception, such as condoms, until you have taken the pill for two days. If you start the progestogen-only pill on any other day of your cycle, you will not be protected from pregnancy straight away and will need additional contraception until you have taken the pill for two days. After having a baby If you have just had a baby, you can start the progestogen-only pill on day 21 after the birth. You will be protected against pregnancy straight away. If you start the progestogen-only pill more than 21 days after giving birth, you will need additional contraception (such as condoms) until you have taken the pill for two days. After a miscarriage or abortion If you have had a miscarriage or abortion, you can start the progestogen-only pill up to five days afterwards and you will be protected from pregnancy straight away. If you start the pill more than five days after a miscarriage or abortion, use additional contraception until you have taken the pill for two days. What to do if you miss a pill If you forget to take a progestogen-only pill, what you should do depends on:  the type of pill you are taking  how long ago you missed the pill and how many pills you have forgotten to take whether you have had sex without using another form of contraception during the previous seven days If you are less than three or less than 12 hours late taking the pill If you are taking a three-hour progestogen-only pill and are less than three hours late taking it, or if you are taking the 12-hour progestogen-only pill and are less than 12 hours late: take the late pill as soon as you remember, and  take the remaining pills as normal, even if that means taking two pills on the same day The pill will still work, and you\u2019ll be protected against pregnancy \u2013 you do not need to use additional contraception. Don\u2019t worry if you have had sex without using another form of contraception. You do not need emergency contraception. If you are more than three or more than 12 hours late taking the pill If you are taking a three-hour progestogen-only pill and are more than three hours late taking it, or are taking the 12-hour progestogen-only pill and are more than 12 hours late you will not be protected against pregnancy. You will need to use additional contraception, such as condoms for two or seven days (depending on what pill you are taking) after missing a pill. You should: take the last pill you missed straight away (if you have missed more than one, take only one) take your next pill at the normal time Depending on when you remember, it may mean taking two pills on the same day (one at the time of remembering, and one at the regular time), or even at the same time. How long you need to use additional contraception such as condoms depends on the type of pill you are taking: If you are taking a three-hour pill (such as Femulen, Micronor, Norgeston or Noriday) you will need to use additional contraception for two days after missing the pill. It takes two days for the pill's contraceptive effect on cervical mucus to be re-established after missing a pill. If you are taking a 12-hour pill that stops ovulation (a desogestrel pill, such as Cerazette), you will need additional contraception for seven days. This is because it takes seven days for the pill's effect on ovulation to be re-established after a missed pill. Emergency contraception If you have recently had unprotected sex, you may need emergency contraception. Seek advice straight away from your GP or local sexual health clinic. You can also call NHS 111 or the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123. Vomiting and diarrhoea If you vomit within two hours of taking a progestogen-only pill, it may not have been fully absorbed into your bloodstream. Take another pill straight away and the next pill at your usual time. If you don\u2019t take the replacement within three hours (or 12 hours for the 12-hour pill) of your normal time, use additional contraception, such as condoms, for two days (seven days for the 12-hour pill). If you continue to be sick, keep using another form of contraception while you\u2019re ill and for two days after recovering. Very severe diarrhoea (six to eight watery stools in 24 hours) may also mean that the pill doesn\u2019t work properly. Keep taking your pill as normal, but use additional contraception, such as condoms, while you have diarrhoea and for two days after recovering (seven days if you are taking a 12-hour pill). Speak to your GP or contraception nurse or call NHS 111 or the Sexual Health Line on 0300123 7123 if you are unsure whether you are protected against pregnancy, or if your sickness or diarrhoea continues. Who can use the progestogen-only pill? Most women can use the progestogen-only pill. You may not be able to use it if you have had: heart disease  liver disease  breast cancer  cysts on your ovaries unexplained vaginal bleeding If you are healthy and there are no medical reasons why you should not take the progestogen-only pill, you can take it until your menopause or until you are 55. Breastfeeding The progestogen-only pill is safe to use if you are breastfeeding. Small amounts of progestogen may pass into your breast milk, but this is not harmful to your baby. The progestogen-only pill does not affect the way your breast milk is produced. Pregnancy Although it is very unlikely, there is a very small chance that you could become pregnant while taking the progestogen-only pill. If this happens, there is no evidence that the pill will harm your unborn baby. If you think you may be pregnant, speak to your GP or visit your local contraception clinic. Get medical advice if you have a sudden or unusual pain in your abdomen (tummy), or if your period is much shorter or lighter than usual. It is possible that these are warning signs of an ectopic pregnancy, although this is rare. Advantages and disadvantages Some advantages of the progestogen-only pill include: it does not interrupt sex  you can use it when breastfeeding  it is useful if you cannot take the hormone oestrogen, which is in the combined pill, contraceptive patch and vaginal ring you can use it at any age \u2013 even if you smoke and are over 35 it can reduce the symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and painful periods Some disadvantages of the progestogen-only pill include: you may not have regular periods while taking it \u2013 your periods may be lighter, more frequent or may stop altogether, and you may get spotting between periods it does not protect you against STIs you need to remember to take it at or around the same time every day  some medications, including certain types of antibiotic, can make it less effective The progestogen-only pill is generally well tolerated and side effects are rare. Some side effects can include:  acne  breast tenderness and breast enlargement  an increased or decreased sex drive  mood changes  headache and migraine nausea or vomiting  cysts (small fluid-filled sacs) on your ovaries (these are usually harmless and disappear without treatment)  stomach upset  weight gain These side effects are most likely to occur during the first few months of taking the progestogen-only pill, but they generally improve over time and should stop within a few months. If you have any concerns about your contraceptive pill, see your GP or practice nurse. They may advise you to change to another pill or a different form of contraception. The progestogen-only pill with other medicines When you take two or more medicines at the same time, the effects of one medicine can be changed by the other. This is known as an interaction. Some medicines interact with the progestogen-only pill and it doesn\u2019t work properly. Some interactions are listed on this page but it is not a complete list \u2013 if you want to check your medicines are safe to take with the progestogen-only pill, you can:  ask your GP, practice nurse or pharmacist read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine Antibiotics The antibiotics rifampicin and rifabutin (which can be used to treat illnesses including tuberculosis and meningitis) can reduce the effectiveness of the progestogen-only pill. Other antibiotics do not have this effect. If you are prescribed rifampicin or rifabutin, you may need additional contraception (such as condoms) while taking the antibiotic and for 28 days after. Speak to your doctor or nurse for advice. Epilepsy and HIV medicines, and St John\u2019s wort The progestogen-only pill can interact with medicines called enzyme inducers. These speed up the breakdown of progestogen by your liver, reducing the effectiveness of the progestogen-only pill. Examples of enzyme inducers are: the epilepsy drugs carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone and topiramate  St John\u2019s wort (a herbal remedy)  some antiretroviral medicines used to treat HIV (research suggests interactions between these medicines and the progestogen-only pill can affect the safety and effectiveness of both) Your GP or nurse may advise you to use an alternative or additional form of contraception while taking any of these medicines. Risks of taking the progestogen-only pill The progestogen-only pill is very safe to take. However, as with the combined contraceptive pill, there are certain risks. These risks are small. For most women, benefits of the progestogen-only pill outweigh the risks. Ovarian cysts Some women can develop fluid-filled cysts on their ovaries. These are not dangerous and do not usually need to be removed. These cysts usually disappear without treatment. In many cases, the cysts do not cause symptoms, although some women experience pelvic pain. Breast cancer Research is continuing into the link between breast cancer and the progestogen-only pill. Research suggests that women who use any type of hormonal contraception have a slightly higher chance of being diagnosed with breast cancer compared with people who don\u2019t use hormonal contraception. However, 10 years after you stop taking the pill, your risk of breast cancer goes back to normal. If you have a family history of breast cancer, you may feel that this increase in risk (however small it is) is not worth taking. However, doctors do not think that using the contraceptive pill is likely to increase the risk in women who already have close relatives with breast cancer. Where you can get the progestogen-only pill Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics  some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics  sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services  some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching by postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/12\/2014 Next review due: 29\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 417 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 287  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Combined pill Will antibiotics affect my contraception? External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for young people Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history Taken an extra pill What to do if you've taken an extra contraceptive pill by accident Sexually transmitted infections Find out about the different types of infections you can catch from having unprotected sex or genital contact NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Sexual health","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Sexualhealthtopics\/Pages\/Sexual-health-hub.aspx","content":"Sexual health - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sexual health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Contraception guide Find out about the 15 methods of contraception available on the NHS, plus where to get them and how to decide which method suits you. Sex and young people Are you ready for sex? What should you do if a condom splits? Is your body normal? Answers to these and more. Vagina health Find out what's normal for a vagina, including discharge, size, periods, childbirth and menopause, and how to keep clean and healthy. Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose. Talking about sex How to talk about sex to your partner, teenager or younger child, and why it's important. With tips on what to say. STIs Could you have an STI (sexually transmitted infection)? Find out about symptoms, where to get tests and treatment, and how to protect yourself. Good sex How to have a healthy and fulfilling sex life. Learn about sexual arousal and get tips on how to keep the passion alive. Fertility Find out about fertility, including getting pregnant, fertility problems and IVF. Trans health Find out more about gender identity issues and read real stories about living as a trans person. Gay health Health information for people who are lesbian, gay or bisexual. Includes sexual health and having children. Menopause Everything you need to know about the menopause, including the effects on your body, how your GP can help you, and what you can do to relieve the symptoms. Getting started Find out about contraception and where to get it Where to go for advice Get condoms from the NHS Freedoms shop Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Pharmacy Pregnancy termination GP Support services for HIV Hospital Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Sexual health self-assessment Are you putting your health at risk? Penis problems: a visual guide A visual guide to penis problems Fertility self-assessment Are you having problems conceiving? Also on NHS Choices Common Health Questions: sexual health Abortion Pregnancy and baby guide Sexually transmitted infections Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Contraception guide All you need to know about contraception, how it works and where to get it Community content from HealthUnlocked Need help now? Where to get sexual health help urgently, including advice about what to do after unprotected sex or sexual assault JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: 26\/02\/2015 Next review due: 26\/02\/2017 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vasectomy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/vasectomy-male-sterilisation.aspx","content":"Vasectomy (male sterilisation) - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Vasectomy (male sterilisation) A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is vasectomy (male sterilisation). At a glance: vasectomy   How vasectomy works   Who can have a vasectomy   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks   Common questions During a minor operation, the tubes that carry sperm from a man's testicles to the penis are cut, blocked or sealed. This prevents sperm from reaching the seminal fluid (semen), which is ejaculated from the penis during sex. There will be no sperm in the semen, so a woman's egg can't be fertilised.   Vasectomy is usually carried out under local anaesthetic, and takes about 15 minutes. At a glance: facts about vasectomy In most cases, vasectomy is more than 99% effective. Out of 2,000 men who are sterilised, one will get a woman pregnant during the rest of his lifetime. Male sterilisation is considered permanent \u2013 once it's done, you don't have to think about contraception again. You need to use contraception for at least eight weeks after the operation, because sperm stay in the tubes leading to the penis. Up to two semen tests are done after the operation, to ensure that all the sperm have gone.  Your scrotum (ball sack) may become bruised, swollen or painful \u2013 some men have ongoing pain in their testicles. As with any surgery, there's a slight risk of infection.  Reversing the operation isn't easy, and is rarely available on the NHS. Vasectomy doesn't protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using a condom, you\u2019ll protect yourself and your partner against STIs.  How vasectomy works Vasectomy works by stopping sperm from getting into a man\u2019s semen. This means that when a man ejaculates, the semen has no sperm and a woman\u2019s egg cannot be fertilised. How vasectomy is carried out  Conventional vasectomy No-scalpel vasectomy Before you decide to have a vasectomy How long will I have to wait for the operation? Recovering after the operation How will I know if the vasectomy has worked? Is reversal possible? How vasectomy is carried out Vasectomy is a quick and relatively painless surgical procedure. The tubes that carry sperm from a man's testicles to the penis are cut, blocked or sealed with heat. In most cases, you will be able to return home the same day. Most vasectomies are carried out under local anaesthetic. This means that only your scrotum and testicles will be numbed, and you will be awake for the procedure. You will not feel any pain, although it may feel slightly uncomfortable. In rare cases, a general anaesthetic may be required. This means that you will be asleep during the procedure. A general anaesthetic may be used if you are allergic to local anaesthetic or have a history of fainting easily. However, most people will only need a local anaesthetic. A vasectomy has no effect on sex drive or ability to enjoy sex. You will still have erections and ejaculate normally. The only difference is that your semen will not contain sperm.  A vasectomy can be performed at: your local GP surgery a hospital as a day-patient appointment a sexual health clinic a private clinic   There are two types of vasectomy. The traditional technique, called conventional vasectomy, involves making two small incisions in the scrotum (the pouch of skin that surrounds your testicles) using a scalpel (surgical knife). The other type, called a no-scalpel vasectomy, is a newer technique now in common use. The doctor doing your vasectomy will discuss with you which is best. Conventional vasectomy During a conventional vasectomy, the skin of your scrotum is numbed with local anaesthetic. The doctor makes two small cuts, about 1cm long, on each side of your scrotum. The incisions allow your surgeon to access the tubes that carry sperm out of your testicles. These tubes are known as \"vas deferens\". Each tube is cut and a small section removed. The ends of the tubes are then closed, either by tying them or sealing them using diathermy (an instrument that heats to a very high temperature). The incisions are stitched, usually using dissolvable stitches, which will disappear naturally within about a week. No-scalpel vasectomy You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you No-scalpel vasectomy is usually carried out under local anaesthetic. During a no-scalpel vasectomy, the doctor will feel the vas deferens underneath the skin of your scrotum and then hold them in place using a small clamp. A special instrument is then used to make a tiny puncture hole in the skin of the scrotum. A small pair of forceps is used to open up the hole, allowing the surgeon to access the vas deferens without needing to cut the skin with a scalpel. The tubes are then closed in the same way as in a conventional vasectomy, either by being tied or sealed. During a no-scalpel vasectomy, there will be little bleeding and no stitches. The procedure is also thought to be less painful and less likely to cause complications than a conventional vasectomy. Before you decide to have a vasectomy Your doctor will ask about your circumstances and provide information and counselling before agreeing to the procedure. You should only have a vasectomy if you are certain that you do not want to have any, or any more, children. If you have any doubts, consider another method of contraception until you are completely sure. You shouldn't make the decision about having a vasectomy after a crisis or a big change in your life \u2013 for example, if your partner has just had a baby, or has just terminated a pregnancy. If you have a partner, discuss it with them before deciding to have a vasectomy. If possible, you should both agree to the procedure, but it is not a legal requirement to get your partner's permission. You can have a vasectomy at any age. However, if you are under 30, particularly if you do not have children, your doctor may be reluctant to perform the procedure. Your GP does have the right to refuse to carry out the procedure or refuse to refer you for the procedure if they do not believe that it is in your best interests. If this is the case, you may have to pay to have a vasectomy privately. How long will I have to wait for the operation? In most parts of the UK, a vasectomy is available free of charge from the NHS. However, waiting lists can be several months, depending on where you live. Speak to your GP or ask at your local contraception clinic about vasectomies in your area. As waiting lists for vasectomies can be long, some men choose to pay to have the procedure carried out privately. You can request a male doctor, but in some cases this may mean having to wait longer. Your GP may be able to offer you options of where the vasectomy can be carried out. Recovering after the operation It\u2019s common to have some mild discomfort, swelling and bruising of your scrotum for a few days after the vasectomy. If you have pain or discomfort, you can take painkillers, such as paracetamol. Contact your GP for advice if you are still experiencing considerable pain after taking painkillers. It\u2019s common to have blood in your semen in the first few ejaculations after a vasectomy. This isn\u2019t harmful. Some other common questions about recovery are outlined below. Underwear Wearing close-fitting underwear, such as Y-fronts, during the day and at night will help to support your scrotum and will also help ease any discomfort or swelling. Make sure you change your underwear every day. Hygiene It is usually safe for you to have a bath or shower after your operation \u2013 check with your doctor what is suitable for you. Make sure you dry your genital area gently and thoroughly. Returning to work Most men will be fit to return to work one or two days after their vasectomy, but you should avoid sport and heavy lifting for at least one week after the operation. This is to minimise the risk of developing complications (see below). If any symptoms continue after a few days, consult your GP. Having sex You can have sex again as soon as it is comfortable to do so, although it is best to wait for a couple of days. However, you will still have sperm in your semen immediately after the operation, as it takes time to clear the remaining sperm in your tubes. It takes an average of 20-30 ejaculations to clear the tubes of sperm. You will need to use another method of contraception until you have had two clear semen tests. Once the operation has been carried out successfully and semen tests have shown that there is no sperm present, long-term partners may not need to use other forms of contraception. However, a vasectomy does not protect against HIV infection or any other STIs, so you should still use condoms with any new partner. How will I know if my vasectomy has worked? After the vasectomy, there will be some sperm left in the upper part of the vas deferens tubes. It can take more than 20 ejaculations to clear these sperm from the tubes so, during this time, there is still a risk of pregnancy. Until it has been confirmed that your semen is free of sperm, you should continue to use another form of contraception. At least eight weeks after the procedure, you will need to produce a sample of semen, which will be tested for sperm. This will also help to identify the rare cases in which the tubes naturally rejoin themselves. Once tests have confirmed that your semen is free of sperm, the vasectomy is considered successful and you can stop using additional contraception. A few men continue to have small numbers of sperm in their system, but these sperm do not move (they are known as non-motile sperm). If you are one of these men, your doctor will discuss your options with you. The chances of making your partner pregnant may be low enough to consider the vasectomy successful, or you may be advised to have further tests or consider other options. Is reversal possible? It is possible to have a vasectomy reversed. However, the procedure is not always successful. You have a better chance if it is done soon after the vasectomy. If a reversal is carried out within 10 years of your vasectomy, the success rate is about 55%. This falls to 25% if your reversal is carried out more than 10 years after your vasectomy. Even if a surgeon manages to join up the vas deferens tubes again, pregnancy may still not be possible. This is why you should be certain before going ahead with the vasectomy. Your doctor can help you to make your decision. Reversal is rarely available on the NHS and the operation can be expensive if done privately. Who can have a vasectomy Having a vasectomy should always be viewed as permanent sterilisation. This is because, although reversal is sometimes possible, it may not be successful. A reversal operation requires delicate microsurgery to join the tubes together again. Even with a successful operation, it still may not be possible to father a child. Advantages and disadvantages of vasectomy Advantages The failure rate is only one in 2,000 \u2013 out of 2,000 men who have a vasectomy, only one will get a woman pregnant in the rest of his lifetime. There are rarely long-term effects on your health. Vasectomy does not affect your hormone levels or sex drive. It will not affect the spontaneity of sex or interfere with sex. Vasectomy may be chosen as a simpler, safer and more reliable alternative to female sterilisation. Disadvantages Vasectomy doesn\u2019t protect against STIs It\u2019s difficult to reverse, and reversal may not be available on the NHS. You need to use contraception after the operation until tests show your semen is free of sperm \u2013 if your semen contains sperm, you could make your partner pregnant. Complications can occur \u2013 the risks are listed below. Risks Most men feel sore and tender for a few days after the operation, and will usually experience some bruising and swelling on or around their scrotum. However, in some cases, a vasectomy can cause more serious problems, some of which are outlined below. Haematoma A haematoma is when blood collects and clots in the tissue surrounding a broken blood vessel. Following a vasectomy, you may develop a haematoma inside your scrotum. Haematomas are mostly small (pea-sized), but can occasionally be large (filling the scrotum) and, rarely, they can be very large. This can cause your scrotum to become very swollen and painful. In severe cases, you may need further surgery to treat the blood clot. Sperm granulomas When the tubes that carry sperm from your testicles are cut, sperm can sometimes leak from them. In rare cases, sperm can collect in the surrounding tissue, forming hard lumps that are known as sperm granulomas. Your groin or scrotum may become painful and swollen either immediately or a few months after the procedure. The lumps are not usually painful and can often be treated using anti-inflammatory medication, which your GP will prescribe. If the granulomas are particularly large or painful, they may have to be surgically removed. Infection After a vasectomy, you may be at risk of developing an infection as a result of bacteria entering through the cuts made in your scrotum. Therefore, after the operation, it is important to keep your genital area clean and dry to keep the risk of infection as low as you can. Long-term testicle pain Some men get pain in one or both of their testicles after a vasectomy. It can happen immediately, a few months or a few years after the operation. It may be occasional or quite frequent, and vary from a constant dull ache to episodes of sharp, intense pain. For most men, however, any pain is quite mild and they do not need further help for it. Long-term testicular pain affects around one in 10 men after vasectomy. The pain is usually the result of a pinched nerve or scarring that occurred during the operation. You may be advised to undergo further surgery to repair the damage and to help minimise further pain. Testicles feeling full After a vasectomy, some men may develop the sensation that their testicles are \"fuller\" than normal. This is usually caused by the epididymis becoming filled with stored sperm. The epididymis is the long, coiled tube that rests on the back of each testicle. It helps to transport and store sperm. Any such feelings should pass naturally within a few weeks. However, speak to your GP if you are still experiencing fullness after this time. Fertility In a very small number of vasectomy cases, the vas deferens reconnects over a period of time. This means that the vasectomy will no longer be an effective form of contraception. However, it is rare for this to happen. Common questions about vasectomy Can I have the operation if I am single? Yes, but if you are under 30 you will find that many surgeons are reluctant to do it, in case your circumstances change and you regret it later. Will it affect my sex drive? No. After a successful vasectomy, your testicles will continue to produce the male hormone (testosterone) just as they did before the procedure. Your sex drive, sensation and ability to have an erection won\u2019t be affected. The only difference is that there will be no sperm in your semen. Your body still produces sperm, but they are absorbed without harm. Could being sterile affect me emotionally? It is a big decision to end the part of your life where you could father a child. This is another reason to think it over carefully. If you are sure about your decision to have a vasectomy, you may feel relieved that the worry of possible pregnancy is over and you do not need to think about contraception again. If you feel anxious or uncomfortable about the procedure, or if you think you would suffer mentally from being infertile, then it is not the best type of contraception for you. You can discuss alternatives with your GP or with a professional at a contraception clinic (sometimes called a family planning clinic). Is there any risk of vasectomy causing cancer? Although prostate cancer and testicular cancer can occur in men who have had a vasectomy, research suggests that vasectomy does not increase your risk of cancer. Can I use IVF to father a child? If you have a vasectomy, and then decide later that you want a child, there may be the option of doing so by IVF (in vitro fertilisation). To do this, a surgeon would retrieve sperm from your testicles and use this to fertilise your partner\u2019s egg. However: IVF may not be available on the NHS IVF done privately can be expensive  IVF is not always successful Can I store sperm in a sperm bank, just in case? You could but, as with IVF, sperm stored in a sperm bank cannot be relied on to bring about a pregnancy. It can also be expensive. Where to get contraception Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. You can get contraception, and information and advice about contraception, at: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse  community contraception clinics  some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics  sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraception and STI testing services  some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.  Page last reviewed: 13\/01\/2015 Next review due: 13\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 665 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 240  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 237  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Community content from HealthUnlocked Related articles Female sterilisation External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for young people Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Vasectomy reversal is not guaranteed to work and is not always available on the NHS Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A vasectomy is an operation to cause sterility in men. A consultant surgeon explains what the procedure involves and why you should use contraception for three months after the operation. Media last reviewed: 11\/06\/2015 Next review due: 11\/06\/2017 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Contraceptive injection","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/contraceptive-injection.aspx","content":"The contraceptive injection - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: The contraceptive injection A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the injection. At a glance: the contraceptive injection   How it works   Who can use it   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks   Where you can get it There are three types of contraceptive injections in the UK: Depo-Provera, which lasts for 12 weeks, Sayana Press, which lasts for 13 weeks, and Noristerat, which lasts for eight weeks. The most popular is Depo-Provera. Noristerat is usually used for only short periods of time \u2013 for example, if your partner is waiting for a vasectomy. The injection contains progestogen. This thickens the mucus in the cervix, stopping sperm reaching an egg. It also thins the womb lining and, in some, prevents the release of an egg. At a glance: the contraceptive injection If used correctly, the contraceptive injection is more than 99% effective. This means that less than one woman in 100 who use the injection will become pregnant in a year. The injection lasts for eight, 12 or 13 weeks (depending on the type), so you don't have to think about contraception every day or every time you have sex. It can be useful for women who might forget to take the contraceptive pill every day. It can be useful for women who can't use contraception that contains oestrogen. It's not affected by medication. The contraceptive injection may provide some protection against cancer of the womb and pelvic inflammatory disease. Side effects can include weight gain, headaches, mood swings, breast tenderness and irregular bleeding. The injection can't be removed from your body, so if you have side effects they'll last as long as the injection and for some time afterwards. Your periods may become more irregular or longer, or stop altogether (amenorrhoea). Treatment is available if your bleeding is heavy or longer than normal \u2013 talk to your doctor or nurse about this. It can take up to one year for your fertility to return to normal after the injection wears off, so it may not be suitable if you want to have a baby in the near future. Using Depo-Provera affects your natural oestrogen levels, which can cause thinning of the bones.  The injection does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using condoms as well as the injection, you'll help to protect yourself against STIs. How the injection works You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you The contraceptive injections Depo-Provera and Noristerat are usually given into a muscle in your bottom, although sometimes may be given in a muscle in your upper arm. Sayana Press is given under the skin (subcutaneously) rather than into a muscle, in the abdomen or thigh. The contraceptive injection works in the same way as the implant. It steadily releases the hormone progestogen into your bloodstream. Progestogen is similar to the natural hormone progesterone, which is released by a woman's ovaries during her period. The continuous release of progestogen: stops a woman releasing an egg every month (ovulation)  thickens the mucus from the cervix (neck of the womb), making it difficult for sperm to pass through to the womb and reach an unfertilised egg  makes the lining of the womb thinner, so that it is unable to support a fertilised egg The injection can be given at any time during your menstrual cycle, as long as you and your doctor are reasonably sure you are not pregnant. When it starts to work If you have the injection during the first five days of your cycle, you will be immediately protected against becoming pregnant.  If you have the injection on any other day of your cycle, you will not be protected against pregnancy for up to seven days. Use condoms or another method of contraception during this time. After giving birth You can have the contraceptive injection at any time after you have given birth, if you are not breastfeeding. If you are breastfeeding, the injection will usually be given after six weeks, although it may be given earlier if necessary. If you start injections on or before day 21 after giving birth, you will be immediately protected against becoming pregnant. If you start injections after day 21, you will need to use additional contraception for the following seven days. Heavy and irregular bleeding is more likely to occur if you have the contraceptive injection during the first few weeks after giving birth. It is safe to use contraceptive injections while you are breastfeeding. After a miscarriage or abortion You can have the injection immediately after a miscarriage or abortion, and you will be protected against pregnancy straight away. If you have the injection more than five days after a miscarriage or abortion, you'll need to use additional contraception for seven days. Who can use the injection? Most women can be given the contraceptive injection. It may not be suitable if you: think you might be pregnant  want to keep having regular periods  have bleeding in between periods or after sex  have arterial disease or a history of heart disease or stroke have a blood clot in a blood vessel (thrombosis)  have liver disease  have migraines  have breast cancer or have had it in the past  have diabetes with complications  have cirrhosis or liver tumours are at risk of osteoporosis   Advantages and disadvantages of the injection The main advantages of the contraceptive injection are: each injection lasts for either eight, 12 or 13 weeks  the injection does not interrupt sex  the injection is an option if you cannot use oestrogen-based contraception, such as the combined pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring you do not have to remember to take a pill every day the injection is safe to use while you are breastfeeding  the injection is not affected by other medicines the injection may reduce heavy, painful periods and help with premenstrual symptoms for some women the injection offers some protection from pelvic inflammatory disease (the mucus from the cervix may stop bacteria entering the womb) and may also give some protection against cancer of the womb Using the contraceptive injection may have some disadvantages, which you should consider carefully before deciding on the right method of contraception for you. These are as follows: Disrupted periods Your periods may change significantly during the first year of using the injection. They will usually become irregular and may be very heavy, or shorter and lighter, or stop altogether. This may settle down after the first year, but may continue as long as the injected progestogen remains in your body. It can take a while for your periods and natural fertility to return after you stop using the injection. It takes around eight to 12 weeks for injected progestogen to leave the body, but you may have to wait longer for your periods to return to normal if you are trying to get pregnant. Until you are ovulating regularly each month, it can be difficult to work out when you are at your most fertile. In some cases, it can take three months to a year for your periods to return to normal. Weight gain You may put on weight when you use the contraceptive injection, particulaly if you are under 18 years old and are overweight with a BMI (body mass index) of 30 or over.    Other side effects that some women report are: headaches acne tender breasts changes in mood loss of sex drive Depo-Provera, oestrogen and bone risk Using Depo-Provera affects your natural oestrogen levels, which can cause thinning of the bones, but it does not increase your risk of breaking a bone. This isn't a problem for most women, because the bone replaces itself when you stop the injection, and it doesn't appear to cause any long-term problems. Thinning of the bones may be a problem for women who already have an increased risk of developing osteoporosis (for example, because they have low oestrogen, or a family history of osteoporosis). It may also be a concern for women under 18, because the body is still making bone at this age. Women under 18 may use Depo-Provera, but only after careful evaluation by a doctor. Will other medicines affect the injection? No \u2013 the contraceptive injection is not affected by other medication. Risks There is a small risk of infection at the site of the injection. In very rare cases, some people may have an allergic reaction to the injection. Where you can get it Most types of contraception are available free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics  sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching your postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Page last reviewed: 12\/01\/2015 Next review due: 12\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 546 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 267  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Contraceptive implant  When can I use contraception after having a baby?  External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Does contraceptive jab make HIV more likely? \"Contraceptive injections moderately increase a woman's risk of becoming infected with HIV,\" The Guardian reports. The headline was prompted by a study looking at whether the use of contraceptive injections increases the risk of contracting HIV Antibiotics and contraception Some methods of contraception can be affected by certain antibiotics. Find out which ones NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"COPD","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease","content":"Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Real stories Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Clinical trials Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Community Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Symptoms Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Causes Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Diagnosis Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Treatment Chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease Living with Introduction  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the name for a collection of lung diseases including chronic bronchitis, emphysema and chronic obstructive airways disease. People with COPD have difficulties breathing, primarily due to the narrowing of their airways, this is called airflow obstruction. Typical symptoms of COPD include: increasing breathlessness when active a persistent cough with phlegm frequent chest infections Read more about the symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Why does COPD happen? The main cause of COPD is smoking. The likelihood of developing COPD increases the more you smoke and the longer you've been smoking. This is because smoking irritates and inflames the lungs, which results in scarring. Over many years, the inflammation leads to permanent changes in the lung. The walls of the airways thicken and more mucus is produced. Damage to the delicate walls of the air sacs in the lungs causes emphysema and the lungs lose their normal elasticity. The smaller airways also become scarred and narrowed. These changes cause the symptoms of breathlessness, cough and phlegm associated with COPD. Some cases of COPD are caused by fumes, dust, air pollution and genetic disorders, but these are rarer. Read more about the causes of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Who is affected? COPD is one of the most common respiratory diseases in the UK. It usually only starts to affect people over the age of 35, although most people are not diagnosed until they are in their 50s. It is thought there are more than 3 million people living with the disease in the UK, of which only about 900,000 have been diagnosed. This is because many people who develop symptoms of COPD do not get medical help because they often dismiss their symptoms as a \u2018smoker\u2019s cough\u2019. COPD affects more men than women, although rates in women are increasing. Diagnosis It is important that COPD is diagnosed as early as possible so treatment can be used to try to slow down the deterioration of your lungs. You should see your GP if you have any of the symptoms mentioned above. COPD is usually diagnosed after a consultation with your doctor, which may be followed by breathing tests. Read more about diagnosing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Treating COPD Although the damage that has already occurred to your lungs cannot be reversed, you can slow down the progression of the disease. Stopping smoking is particularly effective at doing this. Treatments for COPD usually involve relieving the symptoms with medication, for example by using an inhaler to make breathing easier. Pulmonary rehabilitation may also help increase the amount of exercise you are capable of doing. Surgery is only an option for a small number of people with COPD. Read more about treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Living with COPD COPD can affect your life in many ways, but help is available to reduce its impact. Simple steps such as living in a healthy way, being as active as possible, learning breathing techniques, and taking your medication can help you to reduce the symptoms of COPD. Financial support and advice about relationships and end of life care is also available for people with COPD. Read more about living with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Want to know more? British Lung Foundation: COPD Can COPD be prevented? Although COPD causes about 25,000 deaths a year in the UK, severe COPD can usually be prevented by making changes to your lifestyle. If you smoke, stopping is the single most effective way to reduce your risk of getting the condition. Research has shown you are up to four times more likely to succeed in giving up smoking if you use NHS support along with stop-smoking medicines such as patches or gum. Ask your doctor about this, call the NHS Smoking Helpline on 0300 123 1044 or go to the NHS Smokefree website. Also avoid exposure to tobacco smoke as much as possible. Want to know more? Find your local stop-smoking service Page last reviewed: 01\/10\/2014 Next review due: 01\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1517 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 783  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 403  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 108  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful COPD Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the name for a collection of lung diseases, including chronic bronchitis, emphysema and chronic obstructive airways disease. It affects an estimated 3 million people in the UK. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Shortness of breath Stop smoking Find stop smoking support External links COPD Decision Aid NHS Smokefree British Lung Foundation NICE: COPD Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cornea transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/corneatransplant","content":"Cornea transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cornea transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview corneatransplant Real stories corneatransplant Clinical trials Cornea transplant corneatransplant When it is needed corneatransplant How it is performed corneatransplant Risks corneatransplant Afterwards Introduction  A cornea transplant is an operation to remove all or part of a damaged cornea and replace it with healthy donor tissue. A cornea transplant is often referred to as keratoplasty or a corneal graft. It can be used to improve sight, relieve pain and treat severe infection or damage. One of the most common reasons for a cornea transplant is a condition called keratoconus, which causes the cornea to change shape. Read more about why you might need a cornea transplant. What is the cornea and what does it do? The cornea is the clear outer layer at the front of the eyeball. It acts as a window to the eye. The coloured iris and the pupil (the black dot in the centre of the iris) can be seen through the cornea. The cornea helps to focus light rays on to the retina (the light-sensitive film at the back of the eye). This \"picture\" is then transmitted to the brain. When the cornea is damaged, it can become less transparent or its shape can change. This can prevent light reaching the retina and causes the picture transmitted to the brain to be distorted or unclear. How is a transplant carried out? The type of cornea transplant you have will depend on which part of the cornea is damaged or how much of the cornea needs replacing. The options include: penetrating keratoplasty (PK) \u2013 a full-thickness transplant deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK) \u2013 replacing or reshaping the outer and middle (front) layers of the cornea endothelial keratoplasty (EK) \u2013 replacing the deeper (back) layers of the cornea  A cornea transplant can be carried out under general anaesthetic (where you are unconscious) or local anaesthetic (where the area is numbed and you're awake). The procedure usually takes less than an hour and, depending on your circumstances, you either leave hospital the same day or stay overnight.  If the procedure involves the transplantation of the outer cornea, the new outer cornea is held in place with stitches, which usually stay in for more than 12 months. An endothelial transplant (EK) doesn't require stitches. It's held in place by an air bubble until a few days later, when it naturally sticks to the deep layer of the cornea. In most cases, a cornea transplant procedure lasts less than an hour. Read more about how cornea transplants are performed. Are there any risks? As with all types of surgery, there is a risk of complications resulting from a cornea transplant. These can include the new cornea being rejected by the body, infection and further vision problems. Around 95% of full-thickness (penetrating) cornea transplants in low-risk conditions, such as keratoconus, last at least 10 years. Read more about the risks of a cornea transplant. After a cornea transplant The recovery time for a cornea transplant depends on the type of transplant you have. It takes about 18 months to enjoy the final results of a full-thickness transplant, although it's usually possible to provide glasses or a contact lens much earlier. Recovery is usually faster after replacing just the outer and middle layers (DALK). Endothelial transplants (EK) tend to have a faster recovery time of months or even weeks. It's important to take good care of your eye to improve your chances of a good recovery. This means not rubbing your eye and avoiding activities such as contact sports and swimming until you're told it's safe. Read more about recovering from a cornea transplant. Cornea donation There is a shortage of donated corneas in the UK. Many more people would benefit from sight-saving surgery if more corneas were donated. Read more about organ donation or register to become an organ donor. You can also call 0300 123 2323 if you wish to join the Organ Donor Register. Page last reviewed: 15\/05\/2015 Next review due: 15\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 196 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 131  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cornea transplant Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An opthhalmologist talks about the reasons for corneal transplant and what happens during and after surgery. Media last reviewed: 10\/07\/2015 Next review due: 10\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Eye health Find visual impairment services Organ donation Visual impairment External links NHS Blood and Transplant (NHSBT) NHSBT Organ Donation: corneas RNIB Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register Waiting for a transplant There are thousands of people waiting for transplants. Organ donation can transform their lives NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Corns and calluses","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/CornsandCalluses","content":"Corns and calluses - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Corns and calluses  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Corns and calluses CornsandCalluses Treatment Introduction  Corns and calluses are areas of hard, thickened skin that develop when the skin is exposed to excessive pressure or friction. They commonly occur on the feet and can cause pain and discomfort when you walk. Corns Corns are small circles of thick skin that usually develop on the tops and sides of toes or on the sole of the foot. However, they can occur anywhere. Corns are often caused by:  wearing shoes that fit poorly \u2013 shoes that are too loose can allow your foot to slide and rub certain shoe designs that place excessive pressure on an area of the foot \u2013 for example, high-heeled shoes can squeeze the toes Corns often occur on bony feet as there's a lack of natural cushioning. They can also develop as a symptom of another foot problem, such as: a bunion \u2013 where the joint of the big toe sticks outwards as the big toe begins to point towards the other toes on the same foot hammer toe \u2013 where the toe is bent at the middle joint Calluses Calluses are hard, rough areas of skin that are often yellowish in colour. They can develop on the: feet \u2013 usually around the heel area or on the skin under the ball of the foot palms of the hands knuckles Calluses are larger than corns and don't have such a well-defined edge. As callused skin is thick, it's often less sensitive to touch than the surrounding skin. Calluses develop when the skin rubs against something, such as a bone, a shoe or the ground. They often form over the ball of your foot because this area takes most of your weight when you walk. Activities that put repeated pressure on the foot, such as running or walking barefoot, can cause calluses to form. Athletes are particularly susceptible to them. Other possible causes of calluses include: dry skin reduced fatty padding \u2013 elderly people have less fatty tissue in their skin regularly holding objects such as a hammer or racquet Treating corns and calluses If you have a corn on your foot, you should see a podiatrist, also known as a chiropodist, who can advise you about treatment. In most areas of the UK your GP will be able to refer you on the NHS. Find foot care specialists in your local area. Treating corns Corns on feet won't get better unless the cause of the pressure is removed. If the cause isn't removed, the skin could become thicker and more painful over time. A corn is a symptom of an underlying problem. You should only treat it yourself if you know the cause and you've spoken to a specialist about the best way to manage it. Over-the-counter treatments for corns, such as corn plasters, are available from pharmacists. However, they don't treat the cause of the corn and may affect the normal, thinner skin surrounding the corn. Corn plasters may not be suitable for certain people, such as those with diabetes, circulation problems, or fragile skin. Treating calluses As with corns, you should only treat calluses yourself after a podiatrist has identified the cause and advised you about treatment. The podiatrist may be able to treat corns or badly callused areas using a sharp blade to remove the thickened area of skin. This is painless and should help reduce pain and discomfort. They can also provide advice on self-care and prescribe special insoles. Read more about treating corns and calluses. Preventing corns and calluses You can also help prevent corns and calluses by looking after your feet and choosing the right shoes to wear. Follow the advice below to help stop any hard dry skin developing: Dry your feet thoroughly after washing them and apply a special moisturising foot cream (not body lotion). Use a pumice stone or foot file regularly to gently remove hard skin. If you use a pumice stone, make sure it dries completely between uses and doesn't harbour bacteria.   Wear comfortable footwear that fits properly. Always shop for shoes in the afternoon, because your feet swell as the day goes on. This means shoes that fit in the afternoon will be comfortable. You should be able to move your toes inside the shoe with a small gap between the front of the shoe and your longest toe. If possible, avoid wearing heels as they increase the pressure on the front of your feet. Don't put up with foot pain as if it's normal. Either see a podiatrist directly or go to your GP, who may refer you to a podiatrist. They'll be able to investigate the underlying cause of your foot pain. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the foot problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/foot_problems_a_visual_guide.html Page last reviewed: 24\/03\/2016 Next review due: 24\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 472 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 234  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Corns and calluses Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Watch this video to find out how to treat corns and calluses (areas of thick, dry, hard skin on the feet that can be very painful). Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Athlete's foot Blisters Bunions Sports shoes External links The British Chiropody and Podiatry Association The Institute of Chiropodists and Podiatrists The Society of Chiropodists and Podiatrists Foot health How to keep your feet healthy and choose the right sports shoes, plus what to do if you have smelly feet Getting help from the podiatrist Taking care of your feet is essential. Here's how podiatrists and chiropodists can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coronary angiography","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/CoronaryAngiography","content":"Cardiac catheterisation and coronary angiography - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cardiac catheterisation and coronary angiography  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview CoronaryAngiography Clinical trials Coronary angiography CoronaryAngiography Why they're used CoronaryAngiography How they're performed CoronaryAngiography Recovery CoronaryAngiography Risks Introduction  Cardiac catheterisation is an invasive diagnostic procedure that provides important information about the structure and function of the heart. It usually involves taking X-rays of the heart's arteries (coronary arteries) using a technique called coronary angiography or arteriography. The resulting images are known as coronary angiograms or arteriograms. Why do I need coronary angiography? Coronary angiography can be used to help diagnose heart conditions, help plan future treatments and carry out certain procedures. For example, it may be used: after a heart attack \u2013 where the heart's blood supply is blocked to help diagnose angina \u2013 where pain in the chest is caused by restricted blood supply to the heart to plan interventional or surgical procedures \u2013 such as a coronary angioplasty, where narrowed or blocked blood vessels are widened Coronary angiography is also considered to be the best method of diagnosing coronary heart disease (where a build-up of fatty substances in the coronary arteries affects the heart's blood supply). Read more about why coronary angiography is used. What happens during coronary angiography? During the procedure, a long, thin and flexible tube called a catheter is inserted into a blood vessel in your groin or arm. Using X-ray images as a guide, the tip of the catheter is passed up to the heart and coronary arteries. A special type of dye called contrast medium is injected into the catheter and X-ray images (angiograms) are taken. The contrast medium is visible on the angiograms, showing the blood vessels that the fluid travels through. This clearly highlights any blood vessels that are narrowed or blocked. The procedure is usually carried out under local anaesthetic, so you'll be awake while the procedure is carried out, but the area where the catheter is inserted will be numbed. Read more about how coronary angiography is performed. After coronary angiography You'll usually be able to leave hospital on the same day you have a coronary angiography, after a period of rest and observation. Most people feel fine a day or so after having the procedure, although you may feel a bit tired afterwards and the wound site is likely to be tender for up to a week. Any bruising may last for several weeks. You'll usually be advised to avoid certain activities \u2013 such as bathing, driving and lifting heavy objects \u2013 for a day or two after the procedure. While you're recovering, it's important to look out for signs of any problems. You should seek immediate medical attention if swelling at the site of your wound gets worse, or if you experience excessive bleeding or circulation problems in your limbs. Read more about recovering from coronary angiography. Complications Cardiac catheterisation and coronary angiography are usually very safe. However, as with all procedures, there are some risks, including: being allergic to the contrast dye \u2013 this is uncommon, but you should discuss any allergies that you have with your cardiologist (heart specialist) before having the procedure bleeding under the skin where the catheter was inserted \u2013 this should stop after a few days, but you should contact your GP if you're concerned about it a very small risk of more serious complications, including damage to the artery in the arm or leg where the catheter was inserted, heart attack, stroke, kidney damage and, very rarely, death  Read more about the risks of coronary angiography. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 19\/01\/2016 Next review due: 19\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 198 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 129  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your guide to a coronary angiogram Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Do you have a coronary angiogram coming up? Watch this video to find out what to expect. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Coronary angioplasty Coronary heart disease Heart attack Healthy hearts External links British Heart Foundation Heart UK Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Lower your cholesterol Foods you can eat and those you should avoid to help lower your cholesterol How to look after your heart Poor diet, lack of exercise and smoking are the main offenders behind the UK's high level of deaths from heart disease Find and choose services for coronary angiography Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coronary angioplasty","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Coronary-angioplasty","content":"Coronary angioplasty and stent insertion - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coronary angioplasty and stent insertion  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coronary-angioplasty Real stories Coronary-angioplasty Clinical trials Coronary angioplasty Coronary-angioplasty How it's performed Coronary-angioplasty Recovery Coronary-angioplasty Risks Coronary-angioplasty Alternatives Introduction  A coronary angioplasty is a procedure used to widen blocked or narrowed coronary arteries (the main blood vessels supplying the heart). The term 'angioplasty' means using a balloon to stretch open a narrowed or blocked artery. However, most modern angioplasty procedures also involve inserting a short wire-mesh tube, called a stent, into the artery during the procedure. The stent is left in place permanently to allow blood to flow more freely. Coronary angioplasty is sometimes known as percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA). The combination of coronary angioplasty with stenting is usually referred to as percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). When a coronary angioplasty is used Like all organs in the body, the heart needs a constant supply of blood. This is supplied by the coronary arteries. In older people, these arteries can become narrowed and hardened (known as atherosclerosis), which can cause coronary heart disease. If the flow of blood to the heart becomes restricted, it can lead to chest pain known as angina, which is usually triggered by physical activity or stress. While angina can often be treated with medication, a coronary angioplasty may be required to restore the blood supply to the heart in severe cases where medication is ineffective. Coronary angioplasties are also often used as an emergency treatment after a heart attack. What are the benefits of a coronary angioplasty? In most cases, the blood flow through the coronary arteries improves after an angioplasty. Many people find their symptoms get significantly better and they\u2019re able to do more than they could before the procedure. If you've had a heart attack, an angioplasty can increase your chances of surviving more than clot-busting medication (thrombolysis). The procedure can also reduce your chances of having another heart attack in the future. How a coronary angioplasty is performed A coronary angioplasty is performed using local anaesthetic, which means you'll be awake while the procedure is carried out. A thin flexible tube called a catheter will be inserted into one of your arteries through an incision in your groin, wrist or arm. This is guided to the affected coronary artery using an X-ray video. When the catheter is in place, a thin wire is guided down the length of the affected coronary artery, delivering a small balloon to the affected section of artery. This is then inflated to widen the artery, squashing fatty deposits against the artery wall so blood can flow through it more freely when the deflated balloon is removed. If a stent is being used, this will be around the balloon before it's inserted. The stent will expand when the balloon is inflated and remains in place when the balloon is deflated and removed. A coronary angioplasty usually takes between 30 minutes and two hours. If you're being treated for angina, you'll normally be able to go home later the same day or the day after you have the procedure. You'll need to avoid heavy lifting, strenuous activities and driving for at least a week. If you've been admitted to hospital following a heart attack, you may need to stay in hospital for several days after the angioplasty procedure before going home. Read more about:  what happens during a coronary angioplasty  recovering from a coronary angioplasty How safe is a coronary angioplasty? A coronary angioplasty is one of the most common types of treatment for the heart. Around 75,000 procedures are performed in England each year. Coronary angioplasties are most commonly performed in people aged 65 or older, as they're more likely to have heart disease. As the procedure doesn't involve making major incisions in the body, it's usually carried out safely in most people. Doctors refer to this as a minimally invasive form of treatment. The risk of serious complications from a coronary angioplasty is generally small, but this depends on factors such as: your age your general health whether you've had a heart attack Serious problems that can occur as a result of the procedure include excessive bleeding, a heart attack and a stroke. Read more about the possible complications of a coronary angioplasty. Are there any alternatives? If many coronary arteries have become blocked and narrowed, or the structure of your arteries is abnormal, a coronary artery bypass graft may be considered. This is a type of invasive surgery where sections of healthy blood vessel are taken from other parts of the body and attached to the coronary arteries. Blood is diverted through these vessels, so it bypasses the narrowed or clogged parts of the arteries. Read more about the alternatives to a coronary angioplasty. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/11\/2015 Next review due: 09\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 322 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 189  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Heart disease Atherosclerosis Angina Bypass surgery Healthy hearts External links British Heart Foundation HEART UK Heart Research UK Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Find and choose services for coronary angioplasty Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coronary artery bypass","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Coronary-artery-bypass","content":"Coronary artery bypass graft - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coronary artery bypass graft  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coronary-artery-bypass Real stories Coronary-artery-bypass Clinical trials Coronary artery bypass graft Coronary-artery-bypass Getting ready Coronary-artery-bypass How it's performed Coronary-artery-bypass Recovery Coronary-artery-bypass Risks Coronary-artery-bypass Living with Coronary-artery-bypass Alternatives Introduction  A coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) is a surgical procedure used to treat coronary heart disease. It diverts blood around narrowed or clogged parts of the major arteries to improve blood flow and oxygen supply to the heart.  Around 20,000 coronary artery bypass grafts are carried out in England every year. Most of these are carried out in men, and around 80% are used to treat people who are at least 60 years of age. Why they're carried out Like all organs in the body, the heart needs a constant supply of blood. This is supplied by two large blood vessels called the left and right coronary arteries. Over time, these arteries can become narrowed and hardened by the build-up of fatty deposits called plaques. This process is known as atherosclerosis. People with atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries are said to have coronary heart disease. Your chances of developing coronary heart increase with age. You're also much more likely to be affected if: you smoke you're overweight or obese you have a high-fat diet Coronary heart disease can cause angina, which is chest pain that occurs when the supply of oxygen-rich blood to the heart becomes restricted. While many cases of angina can be treated with medication, severe angina may require a coronary artery bypass graft to improve the blood supply to the heart. Another risk associated with coronary heart disease is the possibility of one of the plaques in the coronary artery rupturing (splitting), creating a blood clot. If the blood clot blocks the blood supply to the heart, it can trigger a heart attack. Therefore, a coronary artery bypass graft may also be recommended to reduce your chances of having a heart attack. The procedure A coronary artery bypass graft involves taking a blood vessel from another part of the body \u2013 usually the chest, leg or arm \u2013 and attaching it to the coronary artery above and below the narrowed area or blockage. This new blood vessel is known as a graft. The number of grafts needed will depend on how severe your coronary heart disease is and how many of the coronary blood vessels are narrowed. A coronary artery bypass graft is carried out under general anaesthetic, which means you'll be unconscious during the operation. It usually takes between three and six hours. Read more about preparing for a coronary artery bypass graft and how a coronary artery bypass graft is performed. Recovery Most people will need to stay in hospital for at least seven days after having a coronary artery bypass graft. Recovering takes time and everyone recovers at slightly different speeds. Generally, you should be able to sit in a chair after one day, walk after three days and walk up and down stairs after five or six days. When you go home, you'll need to take things easy for a few weeks. You should be able to return to most of your normal activities after about six weeks, including working, driving, and having sex \u2013 most people make a full recovery within 12 weeks. Read more about recovering from a coronary artery bypass graft. Risks of surgery As with all types of surgery, a coronary artery bypass graft carries a risk of complications. These are usually relatively minor and treatable, such as an irregular heartbeat or a wound infection, but there's also a risk of serious complications such as a stroke or heart attack. Overall, more than 95% of people who have a coronary artery bypass graft will live for at least one year, and around 90% will live at least five years. Read more about the risks of a coronary artery bypass graft. After surgery After having a coronary artery bypass graft, most people will experience a significant improvement in symptoms such as breathlessness and chest pain, and their heart attack risk will be lowered. However, it's important to be aware that a coronary artery bypass graft isn't a cure for coronary heart disease. If you don't make lifestyle changes, such as eating a healthy diet and exercising regularly, your grafted arteries will also eventually become hardened and narrowed. In some cases, a coronary artery bypass graft may need to be repeated or you may need a procedure to widen your arteries using a small balloon and a tube called a stent (coronary angioplasty). Read more about healthy living after a coronary artery bypass graft. Alternatives A coronary angioplasty is the main alternative to a coronary artery bypass graft. It's a less invasive operation where a long, flexible hollow plastic tube called a catheter is inserted into a blood vessel in your arm or groin. A balloon attached to the catheter is then inflated to widen the artery and a small metal tube called a stent is often used to help keep the artery open. It usually takes less time to recover from a coronary angioplasty than from a coronary artery bypass graft, but there's a higher chance that the procedure will need to be repeated. Also, a coronary angioplasty may not be recommended if multiple coronary arteries have become blocked and narrowed or the structure of the blood vessels near your heart is abnormal. Read more about the alternatives to a coronary artery bypass graft. How long will I have to wait for surgery? The length of time you'll have to wait to have coronary artery bypass graft will vary from area to area. Your GP or cardiac surgeon should be able to tell you what the waiting lists are like in your area or at the hospital you've chosen. Ideally, you should be treated within three months of the decision to operate. Page last reviewed: 16\/12\/2015 Next review due: 16\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 422 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 235  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Heart bypass: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how a coronary artery bypass, a surgical procedure, is performed and why it would be needed. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Angina Coronary angioplasty Coronary heart disease Heart attack Healthy hearts External links BHF: treatments for coronary heart disease Heart Research UK: looking after your heart NICE: endoscopic CABG NICE: endoscopic leg vein removal NICE: off-pump CABG Coronary heart disease Coronary heart disease is responsible for more deaths than any other health condition, both in the UK and worldwide. Find out what you can do to avoid it 10 healthy heart tips Heart disease can be prevented by a healthy diet and lifestyle. Get the top 10 tips for a healthy heart Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coronary heart disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Coronary-heart-disease","content":"Coronary heart disease (ischaemic heart disease) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coronary heart disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coronary-heart-disease Real stories Coronary-heart-disease Clinical trials Coronary heart disease Coronary-heart-disease Symptoms Coronary-heart-disease Causes Coronary-heart-disease Diagnosis Coronary-heart-disease Treatment Coronary-heart-disease Recovery Coronary-heart-disease Prevention Introduction  Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of death both in the UK and worldwide. It's responsible for more than 73,000 deaths in the UK each year. About 1 in 6 men and 1 in 10 women die from CHD. In the UK, there are an estimated 2.3 million people living with CHD and around 2 million people affected by angina (the most common symptom of coronary heart disease).  CHD generally affects more men than women, although from the age of 50 the chances of developing the condition are similar for both sexes. As well as angina (chest pain), the main symptoms of CHD are heart attacks and heart failure. However, not everyone has the same symptoms and some people may not have any before CHD is diagnosed. CHD is sometimes called ischaemic heart disease. Read more about the symptoms of coronary heart disease. The heart The heart is a muscle about the size of your fist. It pumps blood around your body and beats approximately 70 times a minute. After the blood leaves the right side of the heart, it goes to your lungs where it picks up oxygen. The oxygen-rich blood returns to your heart and is then pumped to the body's organs through a network of arteries. The blood returns to your heart through veins before being pumped back to your lungs again. This process is called circulation. The heart gets its own supply of blood from a network of blood vessels on the heart's surface called coronary arteries. What causes coronary heart disease? Coronary heart disease is the term that describes what happens when your heart's blood supply is blocked or interrupted by a build-up of fatty substances in the coronary arteries. Over time, the walls of your arteries can become furred up with fatty deposits. This process is known as atherosclerosis and the fatty deposits are called atheroma. Atherosclerosis can be caused by lifestyle factors and other conditions, such as: smoking high cholesterol high blood pressure (hypertension) diabetes Read more about the causes of coronary heart disease. Diagnosing coronary heart disease If your doctor feels you're at risk of CHD, they may carry out a risk assessment. This involves asking about your medical and family history, your lifestyle and taking a blood test. Further tests may be needed to confirm a diagnosis of CHD, including: an MRI scan a CT scan coronary angiography Read more about diagnosing coronary heart disease. Treating coronary heart disease Coronary heart disease can't be cured but treatment can help manage the symptoms and reduce the chances of problems such as heart attacks. Treatment can include lifestyle changes, such as regular exercise and stopping smoking, as well as medication and surgery. Read more about treating coronary heart disease. Recovery If you have problems, such as a heart attack or heart surgery, it's possible to eventually resume a normal life. Advice and support is available to help you deal with aspects of your life that may have been affected by CHD. Read more about recovering from the effects of coronary heart disease. Prevention You can reduce your risk of getting CHD by making some simple lifestyle changes. These include: eating a healthy, balanced diet  being physically active giving up smoking controlling blood cholesterol and sugar levels Keeping your heart healthy will also have other health benefits, such as helping reduce your risk of stroke and dementia. Read more about preventing coronary heart disease. Find heart disease support groups Heart disease support groups near LocationName   Change Use my current location Your location could not be found. Please try again or enter an alternative location. Please enter a location. Enter a postcode or town MainLocationName is set as your main location delete LocationName will no longer be used as your main location Confirm Cancel Sorry, there has been a problem retrieving your results. Please try again later. No heart disease support groups were found near LocationName Search a wider area or change location View more results Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/09\/2014 Next review due: 26\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1192 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 649  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 251  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 171  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Angina Find heart disease support services Healthy weight calculator Heart attack Hypertension risk NHS Health Check External links British Cardiovascular Society British Heart Foundation Heart Research UK Heart UK Lab Tests Online UK: LDL test Lab Tests Online UK: lipid profile Heart age How healthy is your heart? Use this tool to find out if your heart age is higher or lower than your actual age. Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Angina","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Angina","content":"Angina - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Angina  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Angina Clinical trials Angina Angina Symptoms Angina Causes Angina Diagnosis Angina Treatment Angina Complications Angina Prevention Introduction  Angina is chest pain that occurs when the blood supply to the muscles of the heart is restricted. It usually happens because the arteries supplying the heart become hardened and narrowed. The pain and discomfort of angina feels like a dull, heavy or tight pain in the chest that can sometimes spread to the left arm, neck, jaw or back. The pain is usually triggered by physical activity or stress and typically only lasts for a few minutes. This is often referred to as an angina attack. Read more about the symptoms of angina. When to seek medical help Dial 999 to request an ambulance if you experience chest pain and you haven't previously been diagnosed with a heart problem. If you have an angina attack and you've previously been diagnosed with the condition, take the medication prescribed for you (glyceryl trinitrate). A second dose can be taken after five minutes if the first dose doesn't have any effect. If there's no improvement five minutes after the second dose, call 999 and ask for an ambulance. Types of angina The two main types of angina are stable angina and unstable angina. stable angina \u2013 where angina attacks are brought on by an obvious trigger (such as exercise) and improve with medication and rest unstable angina \u2013 where angina attacks are more unpredictable, occurring with no obvious trigger and continuing despite resting Stable angina isn't life-threatening on its own. However, it's a serious warning sign that you're at increased risk of developing a life-threatening heart attack or stroke. Some people develop unstable angina after previously having stable angina, while others experience unstable angina with no history of having angina before. Unstable angina should be regarded as a medical emergency, because it's a sign that the function of your heart has suddenly and rapidly deteriorated, increasing your risk of having a heart attack or stroke. Read more about diagnosing angina. Why angina happens Most cases of angina are caused by atherosclerosis, which is the hardening and narrowing of arteries as a result of a build-up of fatty substances known as plaques. This can restrict the blood supply to the heart and trigger the symptoms of angina. Advanced age, smoking, obesity and eating a diet high in saturated fats all increase your risk of developing atherosclerosis. Read more about the causes of angina. Treating angina Treatment for angina aims to relieve the symptoms during an angina attack, reduce the number of angina attacks that a person has, and reduce the risk of a heart attack or stroke happening. A number of medications can be used to try to achieve this. Some of these are only taken when needed, while others are taken every day. Surgery to widen or bypass the narrowed arteries may be recommended if the symptoms don't respond to medication. Read more about treating angina. Complications A major concern for people with angina is that their atherosclerosis will continue to get worse. This can lead to the blood supply to their heart becoming blocked, which could trigger a heart attack. Similarly, a blockage of the blood supply to the brain could trigger a stroke. Each year it's estimated that 1 in every 100 people with stable angina will have a fatal heart attack or stroke, and as many as 1 in 40 people will have a non-fatal heart attack or stroke. You can considerably reduce your risk of developing these complications by making lifestyle changes. For example, if you're obese and you smoke, you can significantly reduce your risk by stopping smoking and maintaining a healthy weight. Read more about the complications of angina and preventing angina. Who's affected by angina Angina is a common condition among older adults. In England, it's estimated that 1 in every 12 men and 1 in every 30 women between 55 and 64 years of age have angina. This figure rises to 1 in every 7 men and 1 in every 12 women who are over 65 years of age. Angina is more common in men than women.  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/04\/2015 Next review due: 29\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1275 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 668  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 384  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 133  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Angina Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A consultant cardiologist explains angina, a syndrome caused by a restriction in the supply of oxygen-rich blood to the heart. He explains the risks, symptoms and treatment, and who is most likely to develop angina. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Healthy hearts Chest pain Atherosclerosis Heart attacks High blood pressure Stroke External links Stable Angina Decision Aid British Heart Foundation - Angina Angina.org - the experts' guide to patient-centred angina care Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Find and choose services for Angina Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Healthy hearts","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Healthyhearts\/Pages\/Healthyheartshome.aspx","content":"Healthy hearts - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Healthy hearts Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Heart health Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Lower your cholesterol A fatty diet can raise your cholesterol, increasing your risk of heart disease and stroke. Get food tips for lowering your cholesterol. Women and heart disease Heart disease is the biggest cause of death for British women. Use these nine tips for women to protect yourself. Top 10 healthy heart tips Heart disease can be prevented by maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Find out the top 10 ways to a healthy heart. Travelling with a heart condition Travelling with a heart condition, including vaccinations, travel insurance, air travel, pacemakers and ICDs. Abdominal aortic aneurysm screening Find out about AAA screening and why it's offered to men aged 65 and over. How to look after your heart Poor diet, lack of exercise and smoking are the main offenders behind the UK's high level of deaths from heart disease. 'My smoking scare' A lifelong smoking habit nearly cost Derek Edwards his life. Fortunately, he says he's learned his lesson. Is your blood pressure too high? Avoid high blood pressure by making some simple lifestyle changes. Sam Allardyce: 'My heart op shock' Football manager Sam Allardyce talks about his heart operation and how regular visits to his GP may have saved his life. Tools Are you a healthy weight? Check your weight and get personal advice Community content from HealthUnlocked Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important What's your heart age? Take the online test to find out whether your heart age is higher or lower than your actual age Brugada syndrome A leading cause of sudden cardiac death in young, otherwise healthy people. Read more... Shortness of breath Why you should see a doctor if you're feeling breathless Heart palpitations Does your heart occasionally flutter or start pounding? Read about the common causes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Heart attack","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Heart-attack","content":"Heart attack - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Heart attack  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Heart-attack Real stories Heart-attack Clinical trials Heart-attack Community Heart attack Heart-attack Symptoms Heart-attack Causes Heart-attack Diagnosis Heart-attack Treatment Heart-attack Complications Heart-attack Recovery Heart-attack Prevention Introduction  A heart attack is a serious medical emergency in which the supply of blood to the heart is suddenly blocked, usually by a blood clot. Lack of blood to the heart can seriously damage the heart muscle. A heart attack is known medically as a myocardial infarction or MI. Symptoms can include: chest pain \u2013 the chest can feel like it is being pressed or squeezed by a heavy object, and pain can radiate from the chest to the jaw, neck, arms and back shortness of breath feeling weak and\/or lightheaded overwhelming feeling of anxiety It is important to stress that not everyone experiences severe chest pain; the pain can often be mild and mistaken for indigestion. It is the combination of symptoms that is important in determining whether a person is having a heart attack, and not the severity of chest pain. Read more about the symptoms of a heart attack. Treating heart attacks A heart attack is a medical emergency. Dial 999 and ask for an ambulance if you think you or someone you know is having a heart attack. If the casualty is not allergic to aspirin and it\u2019s easily available, give them a tablet (ideally 300mg) to slowly chew and then swallow while waiting for the ambulance to arrive. The aspirin will help to thin the blood and reduce the risk of a heart attack. Treatment for a heart attack will depend on how serious it is. Two main treatments are: using medication to dissolve blood clots surgery to help restore blood to the heart Read more about treating heart attacks. What causes a heart attack? Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of heart attacks. CHD is a condition in which coronary arteries (the major blood vessels that supply blood to the heart) get clogged up with deposits of cholesterol. These deposits are called plaques. Before a heart attack, one of the plaques ruptures (bursts), causing a blood clot to develop at the site of the rupture. The clot may then block the supply of blood running through the coronary artery, triggering a heart attack. Your risk of developing CHD is increased by: smoking a high-fat diet diabetes high cholesterol high blood pressure being overweight or obese Read more about the causes of heart attacks. Recovery The time it takes to recover from a heart attack will depend on the amount of damage to the heart muscle. Some people are well enough to return to work after two weeks. Other people may take several months to recover. The recovery process aims to: reduce your risk of another heart attack through a combination of lifestyle changes, such as eating a healthy diet, and medications, such as statins (which help lower blood cholesterol levels) gradually restore your physical fitness so you can resume normal activities (known as cardiac rehabilitation) Most people can return to work after having a heart attack, but how quickly will depend on your health, the state of your heart and the type of work you do. Read more about recovering from a heart attack. Who is affected Heart attacks are one of the most common reasons why a person requires emergency medical treatment. Men are more likely to have a heart attack than women. The British Heart Foundation estimates that around 50,000 men and 32,000 women have a heart attack each year in England. Most heart attacks occur in people aged over 45. Complications Complications of heart attacks can be serious and possibly life-threatening. These include: arrhythmia \u2013 this is an abnormal heartbeat, where the heart begins beating faster and faster, then stops beating (cardiac arrest) cardiogenic shock \u2013 where the heart's muscles are severely damaged and can no longer contract properly to supply enough blood to maintain many body functions heart rupture \u2013 where the heart\u2019s muscles, walls or valves split apart (rupture) These complications can occur quickly after a heart attack and are a leading cause of death. Many people will die suddenly from a complication of a heart attack before reaching hospital. Read more about the complications of a heart attack. Outlook The outlook for people who have had a heart attack can be highly variable, depending on: their age \u2013 the older you are, the more likely you are to experience serious complications the severity of the heart attack \u2013 specifically, how much of the heart's muscle has been damaged during the attack how long it took before a person received treatment \u2013 the longer the delay, the worse the outlook tends to be In general, around one third of people who have a heart attack die as a result. These deaths often occur before a person reaches hospital or, alternatively, within the first 28 days after the heart attack. If a person survives for 28 days after having a heart attack, their outlook improves dramatically and most people will go on to live for many years. Heart attack Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A consultant cardiologist explains what a heart attack is, the symptoms, surgical treatments and why it's important for coronary heart disease patients to reduce their risk factors. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Reducing your risk of a heart attack There are five main steps you can take to reduce your risk of having a heart attack (or having another heart attack): smokers should quit smoking lose weight if you are overweight or obese take regular exercise \u2013 adults should do at least 150 minutes (2 hours and 30 minutes) of moderate-intensity aerobic activity each week, unless advised otherwise by the doctor in charge of your care eat a low-fat, high-fibre diet, including whole grains and plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables (at least five portions a day) moderate your alcohol consumption \u2013 read more about the alcohol units Find out how to prevent a heart attack. 'My smoking wake-up call' A lifelong smoking habit nearly cost Derek Edwards his life. Fortunately, he says he's learned his lesson Page last reviewed: 13\/06\/2014 Next review due: 13\/06\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 443 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 266  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links NHS Health Check Atherosclerosis Coronary heart disease Heart health Angina Heart and lungs news Find services: heart disease support External links British Heart Foundation NHS Smokefree healthtalk.org: real stories HEART UK The Arrhythmia Alliance Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important 'My heart op shock' Football manager Sam Allardyce talks about his heart operation and how regular visits to his GP may have saved his life Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Heart attack Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cortical death","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Vegetative-state","content":"Disorders of consciousness - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Disorders of consciousness  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vegetative-state Clinical trials Vegetative-state Disorders of consciousness Vegetative-state Causes Vegetative-state Diagnosis Introduction  A disorder of consciousness, or impaired consciousness, is a state where consciousness has been affected by damage to the brain. Consciousness requires both wakefulness and awareness. Wakefulness is the ability to open your eyes and have basic reflexes such as coughing, swallowing and sucking. Awareness is associated with more complex thought processes and is more difficult to assess. Currently, the assessment of awareness relies on physical responses being detected during an examination. The main disorders of consciousness are: coma vegetative state minimally conscious state Coma A coma is when a person shows no signs of being awake and no signs of being aware. A person in a coma lies with their eyes closed and doesn't respond to their environment, voices or pain. A coma usually lasts for less than two to four weeks, during which time a person may wake up or progress into a vegetative state or minimally conscious state. Read more about comas. Vegetative state A vegetative state is when a person is awake but is showing no signs of awareness. A person in a vegetative state may open their eyes, wake up and fall asleep at regular intervals and have basic reflexes, such as blinking when they're startled by a loud noise, or withdrawing their hand when it's squeezed hard. They're also able to regulate their heartbeat and breathing without assistance. However, a person in a vegetative state doesn't show any meaningful responses, such as following an object with their eyes or responding to voices. They also show no signs of experiencing emotions. If a person is in a vegetative state for a long time, it may be considered to be: a continuing vegetative state \u2013 when it's been longer than four weeks a permanent vegetative state \u2013 when it's been more than six months if caused by a non-traumatic brain injury, or more than 12 months if caused by a traumatic brain injury If a person is diagnosed as being in a permanent vegetative state, recovery is extremely unlikely but not impossible. Minimally conscious state A person who shows clear but minimal or inconsistent awareness is classified as being in a minimally conscious state. They may have periods where they can communicate or respond to commands, such as moving a finger when asked. A person may enter a minimally conscious state after being in a coma or vegetative state. In some cases a minimally conscious state is a stage on the route to recovery, but in others it's permanent. As with vegetative state, a continuing minimally conscious state means it has lasted longer than four weeks. However, it's more difficult to diagnose a permanent minimally conscious state because it depends on things such as: the type of brain injury how severe the injury is how responsive the person is In most cases, a minimally conscious state isn't usually considered to be permanent until it's lasted several years. Why they happen Disorders of consciousness can occur if the parts of the brain involved with consciousness are damaged. These types of brain injury can be divided into: traumatic brain injury \u2013 the result of a severe head injury, such as an injury sustained during a car accident or a fall from a great height non-traumatic brain injury \u2013 where the injury to the brain is caused by a health condition, such as a stroke progressive brain damage \u2013 where the brain is gradually damaged over time; for example, because of Alzheimer's disease Read more about the causes of disorders of consciousness. Making a diagnosis A disorder of consciousness will only be confirmed after extensive testing to determine the person's level of wakefulness and awareness. These examinations need to be carried out by someone experienced in disorders of consciousness, although the views of other healthcare professionals and family members should also be taken into consideration. For some states of impaired consciousness, such as vegetative state and minimally conscious state, there are recommended criteria to help confirm a diagnosis. Read more about diagnosing disorders of consciousness. Treatment and care Treatment can't ensure recovery from a state of impaired consciousness. Instead, supportive treatment is used to give the best chance of natural improvement. This can involve: providing nutrition through a feeding tube  making sure the person is moved regularly so they don't develop pressure ulcers gently exercising their joints to prevent them becoming tight keeping their skin clean managing their bowel and bladder \u2013 for example, using a tube known as a catheter to drain the bladder keeping their teeth and mouth clean offering opportunities for periods of meaningful activity \u2013 such as listening to music or watching television, being shown pictures or hearing family members talking Sensory stimulation In some cases, a treatment called sensory stimulation may be used in an attempt to increase responsiveness. This involves stimulating the main senses, such as vision, hearing and smell. It's usually carried out by a trained specialist, but family members are often encouraged to be involved. Some examples of sensory stimulation include: visual \u2013 showing photos of friends and family, or a favourite film hearing \u2013 talking or playing a favourite song smell \u2013 putting flowers in the room or spraying a favourite perfume touch \u2013 holding their hand or stroking their skin with different fabrics It's not entirely clear how effective sensory stimulation is, but it's sometimes considered worthwhile.  Recovery It's impossible to predict the chances of someone in a state of impaired consciousness improving. It largely depends on: the type of brain injury how severe the injury is the person's age how long they've been in the state for Some people improve gradually, whereas others stay in a state of impaired consciousness for years. Many people never recover consciousness. There are only isolated cases of people recovering consciousness after several years. The few people who do regain consciousness after this time often have severe disabilities caused by the damage to their brain. Withdrawing nutritional support If a person has been in a vegetative state for a minimum of 12 months, it may be recommended that nutritional support is withdrawn. This is because: there's almost no chance of a recovery by this point prolonging life would have no benefit for the person concerned prolonging treatment could offer false hope and cause unnecessary emotional distress for the friends and family of the person concerned The medical team will discuss the issue with family members, but the decision has to be referred to the courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland before any further action can be taken. In Scotland a court ruling isn't required, but is often sought. If the court agrees with the decision, a palliative care team will usually be involved in planning the withdrawal. Once nutritional support is eventually withdrawn, the person will die within a few days or weeks. Locked-in syndrome Locked-in syndrome has similar features to disorders of consciousness, but is considered and treated differently.  A person with locked-in syndrome is both conscious and aware, but completely paralysed and unable to speak. They're usually able to move their eyes and are sometimes able to communicate by blinking. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/09\/2015 Next review due: 23\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 82 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bereavement Coma End of life care End of life issues Severe head injury External links Headway UK: coma and reduced awareness states healthtalk.org: family experiences of vegetative and minimally conscious states National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS): coma information Bereavement Information and real stories about coping with different types of bereavement Coma Find out about comas, a state of unconsciousness where a person is unresponsive and cannot be woken up NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Corticobasal degeneration","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Corticobasal-degeneration","content":"Corticobasal degeneration - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Corticobasal degeneration  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Corticobasal-degeneration Clinical trials Corticobasal-degeneration Community Corticobasal degeneration Corticobasal-degeneration Symptoms Corticobasal-degeneration Diagnosis Corticobasal-degeneration Treatment Introduction  Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is a rare condition that can cause gradually worsening problems with movement, speech, memory and swallowing. It's often also called corticobasal syndrome (CBS). CBD is caused by increasing numbers of brain cells becoming damaged or dying over time. Most cases of CBD develop in adults aged between 50 and 70. CBD symptoms The symptoms of CBD get gradually worse over time. They are very variable and many people only have a few of them. Symptoms can include: difficulty controlling your limb on one side of the body (a \"useless\" hand) muscle stiffness shaking (tremors), jerky movements and spasms (dystonia) problems with balance and co-ordination slow and slurred speech symptoms of dementia, such as memory and visual problems slow, effortful speech difficulty swallowing One limb is usually affected at first, before spreading over several years to affect other parts of the body. The rate at which the symptoms progress varies widely from person to person. One limb is usually affected at first, before spreading to the rest of the body. The rate at which the symptoms progress varies widely from person to person. Read more about the symptoms of CBD. What causes CBD? CBD occurs when brain cells in certain parts of the brain are damaged as a result of a build-up of a protein called tau. The surface of the brain (cortex) is affected, as well as a deep part of the brain called the basal ganglia. Tau occurs naturally in the brain and is usually broken down before it reaches high levels. In people with CBD, it isn't broken down properly and forms harmful clumps in brain cells. CBD has been linked to changes in certain genes, but these genetic links are weak and the risk to other family members is very low. Diagnosing CBD There's no single test for CBD. Instead, the diagnosis is based on the pattern of your symptoms. Your doctor will try to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms, such as Parkinson's disease or a stroke. You may need to have a brain scan to look for other possible causes of your symptoms, as well as tests of your memory, concentration and ability to understand language. The diagnosis must be made or confirmed by a consultant with expertise in CBD. This will usually be a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves). Read more about how CBD is diagnosed. Treatments for CBD As someone with CBD can be affected in many different ways, treatment and care is best provided by a team of health and social care professionals working together. Treatments may include: medication \u2013 to improve stiffness and muscle spasms, sleep and mood, pain or memory physiotherapy \u2013 to help with movement and balance difficulties speech and language therapy \u2013 to help with communication and swallowing problems occupational therapy \u2013 to improve the skills and abilities needed for daily activities at home palliative care and advanced care planning Read more about how CBD is treated. Outlook There is currently no treatment that has been shown to stop CBD getting gradually worse, although treatments can reduce many of the symptoms. Good care and assistance can help someone with CBD be more independent and enjoy a better quality of life, but the condition will eventually put them at risk of serious complications. CBD usually changes very slowly. Many people find it helpful to plan ahead with their doctors (GP and specialist) to make decisions about what to do in later stages of the illness. Difficulty swallowing can cause choking, or inhaling food or liquid into the airways. This can lead to pneumonia, which can be life-threatening. As a result of these complications, the average life expectancy for someone with CBD is around six to eight years from when their symptoms start. However, this is only an average and CBD is very variable. Information about you If you have CBD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 19\/10\/2015 Next review due: 19\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 69 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support guide End of life care Living with disability Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) External links PSP Association What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Corticosteroids","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Corticosteroid-(drugs)","content":"Corticosteroids - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Corticosteroids  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Corticosteroid-(drugs) Clinical trials Corticosteroids Corticosteroid-(drugs) Who can use them Corticosteroid-(drugs) Interactions Corticosteroid-(drugs) Side effects Introduction  Corticosteroids, often known as steroids, are an anti-inflammatory medicine prescribed for a wide range of conditions. They're a man-made version of hormones normally produced by the adrenal glands (two small glands that sit on top of the kidneys). Corticosteroids are available in different forms, including: tablets (oral steroids) injections \u2013 which can be into blood vessels, joints or muscles inhalers \u2013 such as mouth or nasal sprays lotions, gels or creams (topical steroids) These pages are about steroid tablets, inhalers and injections. Steroid lotions, creams and gels are covered separately. What are corticosteroids used for? Corticosteroids are mainly used to reduce inflammation and suppress the immune system. They are used to treat conditions such as: asthma allergic rhinitis and hay fever urticarial (hives) atopic eczema chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) painful and inflamed joints, muscles and tendons lupus inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) \u2013 including Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis giant cell arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica multiple sclerosis (MS) Corticosteroids can also be used to replace certain hormones that are not being produced by the body naturally \u2013 for example, in people with Addison's disease. Possible side effects Corticosteroids will only be prescribed if the potential benefits of treatment outweigh the risks. They will also be prescribed at the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible time. There aren't usually any severe side effects if you take steroid injections, a steroid inhaler, or a short course of steroid tablets. However, prolonged treatment at high doses \u2013 particularly with steroid tablets \u2013 can cause problems in some people. Potential side effects of long-term treatment include: increased appetite \u2013 potentially leading to weight gain acne thinned skin that bruises easily increased risk of infections mood changes, mood swings and depression diabetes high blood pressure  osteoporosis (weak and brittle bones) withdrawal symptoms caused by suppression of the adrenal glands If you have troublesome side effects after taking corticosteroids, don't stop taking your medication until your doctor says it's safe to do so, because of the possibility of these unpleasant withdrawal effects. Your dose may need to be reduced slowly over a few weeks or months, and you may have to have tests to ensure that your adrenal glands are still working properly before stopping corticosteroids altogether, if you have been taking them for a long time. Read more about the side effects of corticosteroids. Cautions and interactions For most people, including pregnant or breastfeeding women, steroid inhalers and injections are safe. However, they will still only be used if a doctor thinks the potential benefits outweigh the risks. As steroid tablets are more likely to cause side effects, there are some circumstances when they shouldn't be used or should only be used with caution. These circumstances include: having an ongoing widespread infection having mental health or behavioural problems \u2013 such as depression or alcohol dependence having certain underlying physical conditions \u2013 such as liver problems, heart failure, high blood pressure or diabetes taking another medication that may interact with corticosteroids Corticosteroids can often be taken while you\u2019re pregnant or breastfeeding, although your doctor will only prescribe them if the risks of not being treated outweigh the risks associated with the medication. Read more about who can use corticosteroids and interactions of corticosteroids. Anabolic steroids Corticosteroids should not be confused with anabolic steroids, which are sometimes used illegally by bodybuilders and athletes to increase muscle strength. Read about anabolic steroid abuse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/03\/2015 Next review due: 12\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 454 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 188  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Topical corticosteroids Allergies Asthma External links Asthma UK: steroids Arthritis Research UK: steroid injections Yellow Card Scheme Living with asthma Information on diagnosing, treating and living with asthma, as well as what to do during an asthma attack Your medicine cabinet A pharmacist explains the essential medicines no household should be without NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Corticosteroids (topical)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical)","content":"Topical corticosteroids - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Topical corticosteroids  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical) Clinical trials Topical corticosteroids Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical) Cautions Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical) How to use them Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical) Side effects Introduction  Topical corticosteroids, or topical steroids, are creams, gels or ointments containing corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are hormones that can reduce inflammation (redness and swelling), suppress the immune system and narrow the blood vessels in the skin. Their main purpose is to reduce skin inflammation and irritation. Conditions widely treated with topical corticosteroids include: eczema  seborrhoeic dermatitis \u2013 a condition that causes the skin to become flaky, leading to symptoms such as dandruff psoriasis  nappy rash lichen planus \u2013 a condition that causes an itchy, non-infectious rash discoid lupus erythematosus \u2013 a type of lupus that usually only affects the skin skin irritation caused by insect bites or stings Topical corticosteroids can't cure these conditions, but can help relieve the symptoms. See the separate topic on corticosteroids for information about oral (tablets and capsules), inhaled and injected corticosteroids. Types of topical corticosteroids Topical corticosteroids are available in different strengths, which are determined by the amount of corticosteroid they contain. They can be: mild \u2013 such as hydrocortisone moderate \u2013 such as clobetasone butyrate potent \u2013 such as betamethasone dipropionate very potent \u2013 such as clobetasol propionate Mild corticosteroids can often be bought over the counter from pharmacies, while stronger types are only available on prescription. You will usually be prescribed the lowest strength necessary to control your symptoms. Topical corticosteroids are also available in several different forms, including: solutions \u2013 water- or alcohol-based liquids that are non-greasy and easy to apply, but they can sometimes dry out the skin  lotions \u2013 similar to solutions but thicker; they are often recommended to treat larger areas of skin or hairy areas  creams \u2013 thicker than lotions and often recommended when the affected skin has become moist or is weeping ointments \u2013 liquids containing high levels of oil, which can make them greasy; they are usually recommended to treat skin that has become dry and scaly gels \u2013 more solidified, jelly-like substances, often used to treat areas of the body that are very hairy, such as the scalp mousses \u2013 foam-like substances that are also often used to treat the scalp Some topical corticosteroids are available combined with other substances, such as antibiotics or antifungals to treat infected areas of skin. Using topical corticosteroids Unless instructed otherwise by your doctor, follow the directions on the patient information leaflet that comes with your medication. This will give details of how much to apply and how often. Topical corticosteroids usually only need to be used once or twice a day for a few days or weeks at a time and should only be applied directly to the affected areas of skin. Occasionally, your doctor may suggest using a topical corticosteroid less frequently but over a longer period of time, to help prevent periods where your symptoms worsen. Read more about how to use topical corticosteroids. Safety and side effects If used as directed, topical corticosteroids are a very safe treatment. The most common side effect is a burning or stinging sensation when the medication is applied, but this usually improves as your skin gets used to the treatment. Serious side effects, such as thinning of the skin and changes in skin colour, usually only occur if too much potent or very potent topical corticosteroids are used for a long period. Topical corticosteroids are safe for most people to use, but there are some circumstances where they are not recommended. For example, very potent topical corticosteroids should be avoided if you are pregnant or breastfeeding and shouldn't be used to treat young children. Read more about things to consider before taking topical corticosteroids and the possible side effects of topical corticosteroids. Corticosteroids and anabolic steroids The steroids contained in topical corticosteroids shouldn't be confused with the type of steroids sometimes used (illegally) by bodybuilders and athletes. These are called anabolic steroids. Anabolic steroids contain a type of hormone that helps stimulate tissue growth, particularly muscle tissue. If used correctly, topical corticosteroids don't have any effect on muscle growth or development. Read more about anabolic steroid abuse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/12\/2014 Next review due: 15\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 218 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atopic eczema Corticosteroids Dandruff Psoriasis External links British Association of Dermatologists: topical corticosteroids National Eczema Society: topical corticosteroids NICE: eczema in children Yellow Card Scheme Atopic eczema Atopic eczema is a condition where the skin becomes itchy, red, dry and cracked. Find out about why it happens and how it's treated Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cosmetic surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide","content":"Cosmetic surgery and non-surgical procedures \u2013 NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Your guide to cosmetic procedures Are you thinking of having a cosmetic procedure? Whether you're considering a less invasive procedure like Botox or full cosmetic surgery like breast implants, it's a good idea to do your research. You can start by looking up the procedure in the list of information leaflets on this page, or browsing the menu tabs. All cosmetic procedures carry some level of risk. Cosmetic surgery has greater risks than non-surgical procedures. It's important you choose a practitioner or surgeon who is competent to perform the procedure and has the appropriate insurance. Also, make sure you weigh up the costs, as it's unusual for cosmetic surgery to be available on the NHS. You should factor in any additional costs for aftercare and future surgery, and correcting anything that goes wrong. If you're sure you want to go ahead with surgery, you'll need to choose a surgeon and hospital for your procedure and follow the steps from there. Why has this guide been produced? In recent years there has been a sharp rise in the number of men and women opting for cosmetic surgery and less invasive procedures such as Botox and fillers. Worryingly, this comes at a time when an independent review in 2013 (PDF, 1.38Mb) highlighted serious concerns about the cosmetic procedures industry.  The review proposed much tighter and rigorous regulation for non-surgical cosmetic procedures, and made a number of other recommendations to ensure patient safety.  It also stressed the importance of having accurate information and advice available for patients. That's why this NHS Choices guide to cosmetic procedures has been created. This guide should help you understand the risks and effectiveness of different cosmetic procedures, and ultimately help you decide whether cosmetic surgery is right for you.  Making improvements The government welcomed the review (PDF, 1.9Mb) and accepted most of the recommendations to ensure patient safety. The Department of Health has been working with key organisations to implement these recommendations. Improvements are now being made. Doctors who carry out cosmetic procedures anywhere in the UK have been issued with new guidance by the General Medical Council (GMC) to make sure they provide the best possible care for patients. The Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) has also developed professional standards for all surgeons who perform cosmetic surgery. And the RCS will soon be introducing a new cosmetic surgery certification system. This means you will be able to find a surgeon who meets RCS standards for the procedure you are interested in, if you're sure you want to go ahead. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 11 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Types of procedures Botox injections   Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Chemical peels Dermal fillers   Ear correction surgery Eyelid surgery Facelift Hair transplant Labiaplasty (female genital surgery) Laser hair removal  Liposuction Microdermabrasion Nose job   Permanent make-up Skin lightening Surgical fat transfer Tattoo removal Tummy tuck Cosmetic surgery abroad Considering going overseas for your op? Make sure you weigh up any potential savings against the potential risks NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Breast implants","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/breast-enlargement.aspx","content":"Breast enlargement Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Breast enlargement (implants) Having a breast enlargement is a major decision. It can be expensive, the results aren't guaranteed, and there are risks to weigh up. It involves inserting breast implants to increase the size of the breasts, change their shape, or make them more even. But before you go ahead, be absolutely sure about why you want them. Take time to reflect on your decision. It may help to read our article Is cosmetic surgery right for me? and to discuss it with your GP first. Read on to find out: How much does it cost? Where do I go? What does it involve? Choosing your implants  How long do breast implants last? Recovery Side effects to expect What could go wrong What to do if you have problems   More information How much does it cost? In the UK, breast implant surgery costs around £3,500-£7,000, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may not be included in the price. If there is a problem with the implant and it has to be removed, you'll usually need to pay for any replacement and further surgery yourself. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform the operation.  All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. Also, research the surgeon who is going to fit your breast implants. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor's fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? Breast implant surgery is carried out under general anaesthetic. The operation involves: making a cut (incision) in the skin next to or below the breast positioning the implant \u2013 either between your breast tissue and chest muscle, or behind your chest muscle stitching the incision and covering it with a dressing The operation takes between 60 and 90 minutes. You may be able to go home the same day, but may need to stay in hospital overnight if the operation was scheduled late in the day. Pain relief is provided if you experience any discomfort afterwards. Choosing your implants The type of implants most commonly used in the UK are silicone gel, but saline implants are also available. Your surgeon should discuss with you what shape and type of implant is best for you, but below is a rough guide. Silicone gel implants These are filled with either soft or firm silicone gel. Implants filled with the firmer gel are called cohesive gel implants. Some have a polyurethane coating.  Pros: Generally less likely to wrinkle than saline implants. The soft type can give a natural feel. Polyurethane-coated ones are claimed to reduce the risk of capsular contracture and the implant rotating \u2013 see What could go wrong. Cons: If a soft gel implant ruptures, silicone could spread into your breast and cause siliconomas \u2013 see What could go wrong. This is much less of an issue if cohesive implants are used, but this firmer gel may not feel as natural. Polyurethane-coated ones may cause a temporary skin reaction. Saline solution implants  Pros: If the implant were to rupture, the saline solution would be safely absorbed or passed out of your body.   Cons: More likely to rupture or deflate earlier than silicone, as they tend to slowly deflate over time. More prone to wrinkling or folding. May feel less natural than soft silicone. Where to place them The implants can either be placed between the breast and the chest muscle or behind the muscle. You'll need to decide with your surgeon where is best for you, but here's a rough guide. Between the breast and the muscle: most natural location less discomfort immediately after the operation chest muscle is not damaged Under the muscle: extra tissue coverage less risk of rippling and capsular contracture \u2013 see What could go wrong How long do breast implants last? Breast implants will not last a lifetime. They are likely to need replacing at some point. Some women may need further surgery after about 10 years, either because of problems with the implants or because their breasts have changed around the implants. Recovery It can take a few weeks to fully recover from breast implant surgery. You may need to take a week or two off work and shouldn't drive for at least one week. Some surgeons recommend wearing a sports bra 24 hours a day for up to three months after breast surgery. You'd need to avoid heavy lifting or strenuous exercise for at least a month, and keep your breast scars out of direct sunlight for about a year. After a week or two: Stitches would be removed (unless you had dissolvable stitches). Within six weeks: You'd usually be able to return to most of your normal activities. After a few months: Your breasts would usually start to look and feel more natural. You may be able to stop wearing your sports bra. Side effects to expect It's fairly common after breast implant surgery to have:  temporary pain, swelling and bruising a tight feeling in your chest for a few weeks   What could go wrong Breast implants can occasionally result in problems, including: thick, obvious scarring the breast tissue feeling hard because scar tissue has shrunk around the implant (capsular contracture) a ruptured implant \u2013 this may cause small tender lumps (siliconomas) only detectable on breast scans, and the implant will need to be removed creases or folds in the implant the implant rotating within the breast, which may lead to an abnormal shape 'rippling' of the implant \u2013 this occurs when the implant is covered by only a thin layer of tissue, which sticks to the implant surface and is very difficult to treat nerve problems in the nipples \u2013 they may become more sensitive, less sensitive, or completely desensitised; this can be temporary or permanent not being able to breastfeed or producing slightly less breast milk than you would without implants \u2013 your baby won't be harmed if you breastfeed with implants Also, any type of operation carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding infection \u2013 this is rare, but may mean the implant needs to be removed an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic a blood clot forming in the deep veins You should also be aware of a possible link between breast implants and a rare type of immune system cell cancer called anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL). ALCL has been reported in a very small number of women who have had breast implants. So far, it has only been found in scar tissue that develops around textured breast implants. The surgeon should explain how likely all these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn't achieved and feel they need another operation. Mammograms after implants Mammograms for breast cancer screening are less accurate if you have implants, so it's important you tell the radiographer about them. It's safe to have mammograms and they do not cause implants to rupture. They may reveal an implant that has ruptured. What to do if you have problems Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms, such as redness of your breast skin, a burning sensation or unusual swelling. If you experience a problem with your breast implants, you can report this through the government's Yellow Card Scheme. By reporting any issues, you are helping to provide more information on the safety of the implants. If you are not happy with the results or think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). Breast implant registry By June 2016, everyone who has a breast enlargement operation in England will be able to have their breast implants recorded on a national registry.  This measure has been introduced following the 2010 PIP implant scandal, when many women were unable to find out whether they had been given the faulty implants. This registry is designed to capture all breast implant surgery carried out both privately and by the NHS, so patients can be easily traced if implants ever need to be recalled and removed. Talk to your surgeon if you want data about your implants to be stored. Find out more about the registry. More information British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): breast augmentation British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS): breast augmentation   Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA): breast implants \u2013 report cases of anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL)  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 11 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links How do I choose a surgeon?  News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation PIP implants Reconstructive breast surgery after a mastectomy  British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): breast augmentation British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS): breast augmentation PIP breast implants Information for women concerned about PIP breast implants NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Breast reduction (male)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/breast-reduction-male.aspx","content":"Breast reduction (male) Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Breast reduction (male) Some men find that one or both breasts may be abnormally large. Known as gynaecomastia, this condition can result from a hormone imbalance or from being very overweight, which can increase levels of oestrogen and cause breast tissue to grow. Breast reduction surgery is an option for men with this condition. It may also be used to tighten the breast area after dramatic weight loss that has caused the skin to sag. However, it is not suitable for men whose large breasts are simply excess fat from being overweight. Normally, you'll need to pay for breast reduction surgery privately. But the NHS may provide this for you if you've had gynecomastia for a long time, it has not responded to other treatments, and it's causing you a lot of distress or pain. Read on to find out: How much does it cost to have privately?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost to have privately? In the UK, breast reduction surgery for men costs £3,500-£5,500, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may not be included in the price. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for providers that can perform breast reductions for men.  All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. Also, research the surgeon who is going to carry out the operation. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor's fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of aftercare you will receive what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong, and who would pick up the costs if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? Breast reduction surgery is usually carried out under general anaesthetic.  There are several techniques the surgeon could use, but generally the operation involves: making a cut (incision) around the nipple using liposuction to suck out excess fatty tissue extending the cuts and repositioning the nipples if there is a lot of tissue to remove The operation takes about 90 minutes. You usually need to stay in hospital overnight. Recovery It can take a few weeks to fully recover from breast reduction surgery. You may need to take a few days off work. It can take up to six months to see the full results. You will need to wear an elastic garment day and night for a few weeks after the operation. The length of time you need to keep the dressings on depends on how quickly your wounds heal. After one or two weeks, your stitches will either dissolve or be removed at an outpatient clinic. You should avoid stretching, strenuous exercise and heavy lifting for up to six weeks after the operation. You can drive again when it's no longer painful to wear a seatbelt, which may be several weeks. Side effects to expect It's typical after breast reduction surgery to have: sore breasts for a few weeks scars \u2013 these may take several months to fade Most men are just left with a scar around the nipple. But a large breast reduction operation may also result in a scar that runs down vertically and horizontally across the breast crease. What could go wrong Breast reduction surgery can occasionally result in problems, including: thick, obvious scarring unevenly shaped breasts or nipples wound healing problems  loss of nipple sensation bleeding inside the breast tissue (haematoma) \u2013 this generally occurs within the first 24 hours after the operation developing lumps, bruising or swelling Also, any type of operation carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic a blood clot forming in the deep veins The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. What to do if you have problems Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong, and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms, such as redness of your breast skin, a burning sensation or unusual swelling. If you have breast reduction surgery and are not happy with the results or think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you can contact the CQC. If you have any concerns about your surgeon, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): gynecomastia  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links Men's health 40-60  What is gynaecomastia?  British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): gynecomastia Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Choosing a cosmetic surgeon","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/choosing-a-surgeon.aspx","content":"How do I choose a cosmetic surgeon? Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Choosing a surgeon for cosmetic surgery If you've decided to have cosmetic surgery, you'll need to choose a surgeon with the appropriate training, skills and experience to carry out the procedure. This page runs through all the things you'll need to do and the questions you should ask to make sure the surgeon is suitably qualified and experienced. You should: Talk to your GP Check the surgeon and hospital are registered  Visit cosmetic surgery clinics and hospitals  Talk with the surgeon Ask the surgeon about the procedure Look out for the new certification system  Talk to your GP When looking for a surgeon to carry out a cosmetic surgical procedure, your GP may be the best person to contact first.  It's a good idea to talk to them about any health issues you have and whether these might affect or be affected by surgery. Your GP may also know who is an appropriately trained and experienced surgeon in the local area. Check the surgeon and hospital are registered The surgeon must, as a minimum, be registered with the GMC and be fully insured to carry out the procedure in the UK. The Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) recommend choosing a surgeon who is on the GMC's specialist register in the area of practice relevant to this procedure. Check that the person who advises you about the surgery is the surgeon who will actually perform or supervise the procedure. You should also check that the provider \u2013 the hospital, company or clinic \u2013 is registered with the Care Quality Commission (CQC), which is the independent regulator of health services in England. You can ask the provider to show you their registration certificate, or you can look it up on the CQC database of registered providers. The CQC advises that you do not sign up for cosmetic surgery at a hospital or clinic that can't provide evidence that it's registered with them. Researching how good they are Once you've confirmed that the provider is registered with the CQC, research the quality of their service. You can do this by looking at the latest CQC inspection report, which appears when you search for the provider on the CQC website. Visit cosmetic surgery clinics Next, gather as much information as you can about the procedure, the places that offer it (clinics and hospitals), and the surgeons who carry it out.   Visit clinics and hospitals, and don't be afraid to ask questions. Reputable services will be happy to discuss everything with you. Write down any questions you want to ask so you don't forget them. The list could include the following questions: What level of care can I can expect after the operation? Who will look after me? What happens if something goes wrong? What if I'm not satisfied with the result? How much will it cost, including my aftercare? Will it cost extra to have further treatment if something goes wrong? Don't choose a clinic or hospital far from where you live \u2013 you won't want to travel far after an operation. Talk with the surgeon The clinic or hospital you choose should offer you a consultation appointment with the surgeon who will perform or supervise the procedure. Ask them if they are on the GMC's specialist register in the area of practice relevant to the procedure you have chosen. Also, ask if they're insured to perform cosmetic surgery in the UK. Talk to the surgeon about what you want to change and why, the options available, and the likely results of a surgical procedure. Tell the surgeon about any medical conditions you have and all the medications you're taking. Consider getting a second opinion, if necessary. Ask the surgeon about the procedure The surgeon should give you details of exactly what's involved in the procedure, including: how long it will take how it will be carried out the anaesthetic you'll need what pain you can expect afterwards how long the recovery should be the potential risks and complications specific to the procedure how long the results will last Ask the surgeon about their personal complication rate and the most common complications for their patients for this procedure. The surgeon or clinic should not put pressure on you to have the surgery or to make a fast decision. It's normal to have at least two weeks after the consultation to decide whether to go ahead with the procedure. Don't be pressured by talk of special offers that are for a limited time only. If you feel any pressure at all from the clinic or surgeon, go somewhere else. Everyone considering cosmetic surgery should ask themselves these three questions:  Do I understand clearly what's going to be done to me? Are my expectations of the results of the surgery realistic \u2013 not of perfection, but reasonable improvement? Do I understand what could go wrong and, if so, could I cope if it did go wrong? The Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) website has some answers to common questions about surgery. Look out for the new certification system  At the moment, doctors who provide cosmetic surgery independently in the private sector only need to be registered with and licensed by the General Medical Council (GMC) as a doctor. There is no legal requirement for the doctor to be a specialist surgeon on the GMC's specialist register. So to make cosmetic surgery as safe as possible, the Department of Health asked the Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) to develop a certification system. This certification system, being introduced in 2016, would enable surgeons who perform cosmetic surgery to demonstrate that they have the appropriate skills and experience to perform cosmetic surgical procedures. Any surgeon who has been certified will have demonstrated that they have the appropriate training, skills and experience to perform the procedure. You'll simply be able to visit the RCS website to look for a certified surgeon, for that extra peace of mind. Certification will be voluntary, but it is expected that all surgeons who want to carry out cosmetic surgery in the private sector will certify. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 19 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ear reshaping","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/ear-correction-surgery.aspx","content":"Ear correction surgery Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Ear correction surgery Ear correction surgery is cosmetic surgery to alter the size or shape of the ears, or pin them back if they stick out. Pinning back the ears is known as an otoplasty, or pinnaplasty. It's usually carried out on children and young teenagers, although adults may wish to have it done, too. An otoplasty isn't suitable for children younger than five as their ears will still be growing and developing.  Most people are happy with the results of an otoplasty, and generally it's a safe procedure. But it can be expensive and there are still risks to consider. Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, ear correction surgery costs about £2,500-£3,500, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may be needed. It would only be carried out on the NHS under exceptional circumstances \u2013 for example, in rare cases where a person's ears are causing them significant psychological distress.  Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform ear correction surgery.  All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. Also, research the surgeon who is going to carry out the operation. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor's fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many ear operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? An otoplasty for an older child or adult can be done under local anaesthetic by either a plastic surgeon or an ear, nose and throat (ENT) surgeon. It generally involves: making one small cut (incision) behind the ear to expose the ear cartilage removing small pieces of cartilage if necessary  scoring and stitching the remaining structure into the desired shape and position Or, you may be offered a newer technique that involves scoring the cartilage through the ear skin using a needle. No incision is made, but there's not much good evidence about the long-term quality or safety of this method.  Read the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines on incisionless otoplasty. An otoplasty usually takes one to two hours. If local anaesthetic is used, you are able to go home the same day. Recovery During the first few days after surgery, your ears may be sore and tender or numb. You may have a slight tingling sensation for a few weeks. You may need to wear a bandage around your head for the first few days to protect your ears from infection. You won't be able to wash your hair during this time. Some surgeons recommend wearing a head band at night for several weeks to protect the ears while you sleep. There may be some slight bruising, which can last about two weeks. You may want to delay returning to work or school until the bruising has disappeared.  Sometimes the stitches may come to the surface of the skin or cause the ear to feel tender. Pain and discomfort can be treated with over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. You need to avoid swimming and activities that put your ears at risk of injury \u2013 such as judo or rugby \u2013 for several weeks. Within 5 to 10 days: Stitches are removed (unless they were dissolvable stitches) and any bandage would probably come off. After a week or two: Most children would be able to return to school.  After eight weeks: Swimming should be OK. After 12 weeks: Contact sports should be OK. Side effects to expect After ear correction surgery, it's common to have: a small scar behind each ear slight bruising around the ears soreness, numbness or tingling in the ears These symptoms should fade over time. What could go wrong Ear correction surgery can occasionally result in: inflammation of the ear cartilage a blood clot forming in the skin of the ear stiff ears \u2013 it can take several months for them to become flexible again the ears no longer being symmetrical the surgery not being successful and the ears starting to protrude again Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding infection where the cut was made an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are and how they would be treated if they occurred. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong, and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. The surgeon who treated you is best placed to deal with any complications. If you've had ear correction surgery and you're not happy with the results or think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): setting back prominent ears British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS): ear surgery  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 6 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links How do I choose a surgeon?  Splinting and otoplasty on the NHS  Can I get cosmetic surgery on the NHS? Only in exceptional circumstances would the NHS provide cosmetic surgery for health reasons NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Eyelid surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/eyelid-surgery.aspx","content":"Eyelid surgery Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Eyelid surgery Eyelid surgery (blepharoplasty) is cosmetic surgery to remove excess skin or fat from the eyelids. The aim is to improve hooded or droopy eyelids or eye bags. Before you go ahead, be sure about your reasons for wanting eyelid surgery. Bear in mind the cost, the risks, and the fact the results can't be guaranteed.  It's a good idea to discuss your plans with your GP first. There might be a medical condition affecting your eyelids or a reason why the operation isn't appropriate for you. You can also read Is cosmetic surgery right for me? before making your decision. Read on to find out: How much does eyelid surgery cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost?  In the UK, a blepharoplasty may cost anywhere between £2,000 and £6,000. You should also factor in the cost of any consultations, further surgery or follow-up care that may be needed. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform eyelid surgery.  All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. Also, research the surgeon or ophthalmologist who is going to carry out the surgery. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor's fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? A blepharoplasty can be done under local anaesthetic with sedation or under general anaesthetic. The surgeon would need to know about any medicine you may be taking to reduce your risk of blood clots, such as aspirin or warfarin. Surgery on the upper eyelids generally involves: making a cut (incision) along the eyelid crease in the natural skin fold of the eyelid removing excess skin, fat or muscle closing up the incision \u2013 the scar will be hidden in the natural fold of the eyelid Surgery on the lower eyelids generally involves: making an incision either just below the lower lashes or on the inside of the eyelid moving or removing fat from the bags under the eyes, and sometimes also a small amount of skin supporting the muscles and tendon of the eyelid if necessary The surgeon will normally apply thin, sticky strips called suture strips to support the eyelids after surgery. These are usually removed up to a week later. An upper blepharoplasty may take about one hour. Surgery on the lower lid may take up to two hours. Most patients can go home the same day. Recovery It's advisable to take about a week off work to recover from eyelid surgery. It may be obvious for a little longer than a week that you've just had eyelid surgery. You won't be able to drive for a number of days after the operation. Bruises, scars and redness may take several weeks to fade. You probably need to: prop your head up with pillows for a couple of days when resting to reduce the swelling gently clean your eyelids using prescribed ointment or eyedrops hold a cold pack to your eye for a few days \u2013 try a pack of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel wear sunglasses to protect your eyes from the sun and wind take paracetamol or another prescribed painkiller to relieve any mild pain You should avoid: strenuous activity and swimming for a few days smoking contact lenses and rubbing the eyes Side effects to expect It's common after eyelid surgery to temporarily have: puffy, numb eyelids that are difficult to close at night irritated, sensitive or watery eyes \u2013 this may last a few weeks bruising that looks like a black eye pink scars \u2013 these eventually fade to almost be invisible What could go wrong Eyelid surgery can occasionally result in:  temporary blurred or double vision your eyes looking slightly asymmetrical a pool of blood collecting under the skin (haematoma) \u2013 this usually disappears on its own after a few weeks noticeable scarring Rarely, it can result in more serious problems, including:  injury to eye muscles the lower eyelid drooping away from the eye and turning outwards (ectropion) the lower eyelid becoming pulled down and showing the white of the eye below the iris (eyelid retraction) blindness \u2013 this is extremely rare Also, any type of operation carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, patients find the desired effect wasn't achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong, and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you're not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with the surgeon who treated you. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): eyelid surgery British Oculoplastic Surgery Society (BOPSS): treatment of common eyelid conditions Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 6 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links Hooded or droopy eyelids  British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): eyelid surgery British Oculoplastic Surgeons Society (BOPSS): treatment of common eyelid conditions Eyelid problems Causes of common eyelid problems, such as swollen eyelids, gritty, itchy or flaky eyelids, and droopy eyelids NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Facelift","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/Facelift.aspx","content":"Facelift Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Facelift (rhytidectomy) A facelift (rhytidectomy) is cosmetic surgery to lift up and pull back the skin to make the face tighter and smoother. The procedure is designed to reduce flabby or sagging skin around the lower half of the face (mainly the jowls) and neck. If you're thinking of going ahead, be absolutely sure about your reasons for wanting a facelift and don't rush into it. The procedure can be expensive, the results can't be guaranteed, and there are risks to consider. It's a good idea to discuss your plans with your GP first. You can also read Is cosmetic surgery right for me?. Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, the cost of a facelift can vary greatly from clinic to clinic and depending on the extent of the procedure.  Expect to pay anything from a few thousand pounds for a mini facelift to £10,000 for a face and neck lift. You should also take into account the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may be needed. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform facelifts.  All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. Also, research the surgeon who is going to carry out the facelift. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor's fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many facelifts they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? A facelift is usually carried out under general anaesthetic. It may sometimes be performed using a local anaesthetic and sedation. There are many different kinds of facelift, but generally the surgeon will: make cuts (incisions) above the hairline at the temples, which extend down in front of your ear, underneath your earlobe and behind the ear make cuts under the chin if the jawline is also being lifted remove the surplus facial skin pull the remaining skin backwards and upwards before stitching it into its new position sometimes redistribute facial fat and tissue or add this to the face bandage the face to minimise bruising and swelling It usually takes two to three hours, and most people need to stay in hospital overnight. Pain relief is provided if you experience any discomfort afterwards. Recovery It takes about two to four weeks to fully recover from a facelift. You need to take this time off work. Bruising is visible for at least two weeks. It could take up to six to nine months to see the full effect of the facelift. You won't be able to drive for a number of days after the operation \u2013 your surgeon would advise about this. You will have to avoid showering and getting the bandages wet for the first two days, and avoid strenuous activity, saunas and massages for at least two weeks. You also need to keep your head propped up with pillows for a couple of days while resting to reduce the swelling. After about a week: Stitches are removed (unless you had dissolvable stitches). After several weeks: Bruises, scars and redness should have faded. After six to nine months: The full effect of the facelift should be seen. Side effects to expect After a facelift, it's common to have: a stiff, puffy and numb face for a few weeks or months temporary bruising of the cheeks \u2013 the bruises will eventually move down the neck with gravity scars \u2013 these fade, but won't completely disappear a raised hairline or sideburn What could go wrong A facelift can occasionally result in problems, including: a collection of blood underneath the skin (haematoma) nerve injury and loss of sensation or movement in the face asymmetrical facial features \u2013 including the position of the earlobe  hair loss or a small but permanent reduction in hair growth around the scars thick, obvious scars developing Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, patients find the desired effect wasn't achieved and feel they need another operation. You should check how this would be funded with your surgeon. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you are not happy with the results of your facelift, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): facelifts British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS): face and brow lift Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links Cosmetic surgery abroad  British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): facelifts  British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS): face and brow lift Choosing your surgeon If you've decided to have cosmetic surgery, opt for a surgeon with the right skills and experience NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Fat transfer (graft), cosmetic surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/surgical-fat-transfer.aspx","content":"Surgical fat transfer Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Surgical fat transfer A surgical fat transfer is cosmetic surgery to move fat from one part of the body to another. It's also known as a 'fat graft' or 'lipomodelling'. The aim is to remove unwanted fat from one area (such as the tummy or thighs) and use it to smoothen or increase the size of another area (such as the breasts or face). Although it's a relatively minor procedure, choosing to have it done is a big decision. It can be expensive, the results can\u2019t be guaranteed, and there are risks to consider. It's a good idea to explore the other options for losing fat before you go ahead. You may also want to read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\" Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems   More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, a surgical fat transfer usually costs between £2,000 and £6,500, depending on the size of the area being treated. There may be additional costs for consultations, aftercare and any further treatment sessions you need. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a surgical fat transfer. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care.  You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out your surgery. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? A surgical fat transfer can be carried out under either general anaesthetic or local anaesthetic. It involves three main stages: Removing the fat. Small incisions (cuts) are made in the skin and a thin tube is used to suck out small amounts of fat (similar to liposuction). The incisions are then closed with stitches and a small dressing placed over them. Preparing the fat. Special equipment is used to quickly spin the fat, to separate it from any blood and other fluids. Injecting the fat. A needle and syringe are used to inject small amounts of fat into the treatment area. The injections are given through tiny holes in the skin, so stitches aren\u2019t usually needed. The procedure usually lasts a couple of hours. You may be able to go home soon after the procedure is finished, or you may need to stay in hospital overnight. If a large area is being treated, your treatment may need to be carried out over two or more sessions. You shouldn\u2019t feel much pain during the procedure, but you may have some for a few days or weeks afterwards. You\u2019ll be given painkillers if you need them. Recovery You\u2019ll need to arrange for someone to drive you home after the procedure. You can start driving again when you\u2019re able to do so without experiencing any discomfort. The treated areas will probably be quite bruised and swollen for a week or two. You may want to take a couple of weeks off work. It can take up to six months for a surgical fat transfer to fully take effect, as some of the injected fat may be reabsorbed by your body during the first few months after the procedure. Side effects to expect It\u2019s common after a surgical fat transfer to have: significant bruising and swelling temporary numbness small scars \u2013 these will fade, but won\u2019t completely disappear loss of some of the fat from the injected area during the first few months What could go wrong A surgical fat transfer is generally a safe procedure, but it can occasionally result in: a collection of blood underneath the skin (haematoma) death of fat tissue (fat necrosis) a blockage in a blood vessel caused by a piece of fat (fat embolism) air leaking into the space between your lungs and chest wall (pneumothorax) thick, obvious scars \u2013 sometimes known as hypertrophic scars Any operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. If you notice any problems during your recovery, such as signs of a possible infection (increasing swelling, redness or pain), go back to the surgeon who treated you. If you are not happy with the results, or think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the GMC. More information BAAPS: fat transfer to breast Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 0 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation   How do I choose a surgeon?  Liposuction   BAAPS: fat transfer to breast Is cosmetic surgery right for me? It's a big decision. Ask yourself these questions before deciding whether you want it... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Hair removal, laser","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/laser-hair-removal.aspx","content":"Laser hair removal Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Laser hair removal Laser hair removal is a cosmetic procedure that uses a powerful laser or 'intense pulsed light' (IPL) to remove unwanted hair. This light source heats and destroys hair follicles in the skin, which disrupts hair growth. Common areas to treat are the face, legs, arms, underarms and bikini line. It can be helpful for women with hirsutism (excessive hair growth). Generally, it's most effective on women with pale skin and dark hair, and doesn't work so well on women with dark skin.  Before you go ahead\u2026 Laser hair removal can be expensive, and has its limitations. Cost: In the UK, laser hair removal costs between £40 and £400, depending on the area of skin and number of sessions included. You may be recommended four to six sessions, spaced about four to six weeks apart. Limitations: The results of laser hair removal are not permanent. They usually last from weeks to months, and regular sessions may be needed to achieve and maintain the desired effect. There's no guarantee it will clear all the hair. Safety: Take time to find a reputable practitioner who is properly qualified and practises in a clean, safe and appropriate environment. Ask the practitioner what you should do if something were to go wrong. What it involves You\u2019ll need to shave the area of skin the day before your appointment. On the day, you\u2019ll wear specially designed goggles to protect your eyes during the procedure. Local anaesthetic isn\u2019t necessary. The practitioner usually applies a cool gel or cooling air spray to the area of skin. They then press a hand-held device to your skin and trigger the laser. This may feel like an elastic band snapping at your skin. Each session may take between 15 minutes to over an hour. The number of sessions needed depends on the area to be lasered and the system used.  Afterwards The area may be red with a raised rash for up to 24 hours afterwards. Holding an ice pack to the skin may help (try a pack of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel). Your skin will be more sensitive to the sun after laser hair removal. Avoid sun exposure and tanning beds for at least a week after treatment, and use sunscreen. On rare occasions, laser hair removal can result in: a crust or blister on your skin, which may take up to 10 days to heal  lightening or darkening of the skin for several months afterwards scarring excessive swelling, which may last up to seven days bruising, which may last up to 15 days burns a rare condition called livedo reticularis, where skin becomes mottled a skin reaction called erythema ab igne, caused by prolonged or repeated exposure to the laser or IPL What to do if you have problems If you're not happy with the results or are experiencing problems, take up the matter with your practitioner through the clinic where you were treated. If there are any complications that require medical attention, it is best that you go back to the practitioner who treated you. If this is not possible, you can go to your GP or local accident and emergency (A&E) department. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 0 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation Hirsutism  Save Face: find a practitioner for non-surgical cosmetic procedures  Tattoo removal Thinking of having a tattoo removed? Read this advice first... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Hair transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/hair-transplant.aspx","content":"Hair transplant Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Hair transplant A hair transplant is a procedure to move hair from an area unaffected by hair loss to an area of thinning or baldness. It is suitable for people with androgenetic alopecia (male- and female-pattern baldness) or scarring resulting from injury or burns. It is not usually appropriate for other types of hair loss, such as alopecia areata. A hair transplant isn't normally available on the NHS, as it is regarded as cosmetic surgery. It is a major decision \u2013 a permanent alteration to your appearance \u2013 so weigh it up carefully and don't rush into anything. You may want to read Is cosmetic surgery right for me? before making your decision. Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost? A hair transplant in the UK can cost anywhere between £1,000 and £30,000, depending on the extent of hair loss, the type of procedure you have, and the quality of the clinic and its team. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform hair transplants.  All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. Also, research the surgeon who is going to carry our your hair transplant. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor's fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many transplants they've performed where there have been complications what sort of care would be provided after the operation where the surgeon is based Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? A hair transplant is usually carried out under local anaesthetic and sedation. There are two main ways it can be carried out. Follicular unit transplantation (FUT, or strip method): A strip of hair-bearing skin is removed from the back and sides of the head and divided into individual hair grafts. Each graft contains about two hairs. The grafts are then placed into tiny cuts (incisions) made in the scalp. The wound at the back of the head is closed with stitches. The head does not need to be shaved \u2013 only the area to be removed is trimmed. Follicular unit extraction (FUE): The entire head is usually shaved. A special punch device is used to directly remove individual grafts of hair one by one. The grafts are placed into tiny incisions made in the scalp. Both procedures usually take a full day, but an overnight stay is not required. If a large area is being treated, you may need to have two or more sessions a few months apart. You shouldn't feel pain during a hair transplant. Pain relief will be provided if you experience any discomfort afterwards. The surgeon may give you some lotion or spray to take away and use at home. It's important to follow the instructions you're given when discharged. Recovery You will need to arrange for someone to drive you home if you were given a sedative, as this can take up to 24 hours to wear off. Most patients return to work about three days after their hair transplant procedure. It's usually possible to return to work more quickly following an FUT procedure. The head is not shaved, so your operation may not be noticeable. You should be very careful with your transplanted hair for the first 14 days after your operation. The newly transplanted grafts will not be secure in their new place. After 14 days, you can normally return to your normal hair care routine. Most clinics will ask you to restrict your exercise in the first month to reduce the chances of increased scarring. After a few days: Any bandages can normally be removed. You may be able to wash your hair gently by hand. After a week: Any non-dissolvable stitches can normally be removed. After a few weeks: The transplanted hair will often fall out, and later start to grow back. After six months: New hair will normally start to appear. After 12-18 months: The full results should be seen. Side effects to expect It's common after a hair transplant to have: a tight, achy and swollen scalp for a few days temporary scabbing where the hair was transplanted at least one scar \u2013 although this should fade and is usually only noticeable if your hair is cut very short What could go wrong A hair transplant is generally a safe procedure, but as with any type of operation there's always a small risk of: excessive bleeding infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic or sedation  Your surgeon should be able to treat these problems promptly if they happen. There's also a small risk the transplant won't take and the hair falls out, or an obvious scar develops. The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are and how they would be treated if they occured. If you have male- or female-pattern hair loss, your hair will continue to thin in the areas around the transplant, so it's essential to carefully plan the design of the transplant to make sure the hair remains natural looking as time passes. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn't achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you have a hair transplant and are not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with the surgeon who treated you. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): hair transplant surgery  British Association of Hair Restoration Surgery (BAHRS): hair restoration surgery International Society of Hair Restoration Surgery (ISHRS) Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs   Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links Hair loss (alopecia) Hair loss myth buster How do I choose a surgeon?  Women and hair loss: coping tips Losing your crowning glory can be particularly difficult for women. But there are ways to cope Men's health 40-60 Health and fitness tips for men aged 40 to 60, including dealing with a midlife crisis and how to lose weight NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Labiaplasty","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/labiaplasty.aspx","content":"Labiaplasty Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) A labiaplasty is surgery to reduce the size of the labia minora \u2013 the flaps of skin either side of the vaginal opening. Some women consider having a labiaplasty because they don't like the look of their labia, or because the labia cause discomfort. This is a major decision you should weigh up carefully. It's natural and normal for a woman to have noticeable skin folds around her vaginal opening and, in most cases, this shouldn't cause any problems.  A labiaplasty can be expensive and the operation carries a number of risks. There's also no guarantee you'll get the result you expected, and it won't necessarily make you feel better about your body. If you\u2019re thinking of going ahead, it\u2019s a good idea to discuss your plans with your GP first. There might be a medical condition causing your labial discomfort, or a reason why the operation isn't appropriate for you. If your GP feels that your labia are perfectly normal after examining them, they may want to have a chat with you about your reasons for wanting surgery. You may be advised to speak to a counsellor or psychologist before you commit to any surgery. You can also read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\". Read on to find out the following: How much does a labiaplasty cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems   Who shouldn't have it? How is it different to female genital mutilation? More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, a labiaplasty costs about £1,000-£3,000, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may not be included in the price. Occasionally, a labiaplasty may be carried out on the NHS if the vaginal lips are obviously abnormal and causing the woman distress or harming her health. However, the NHS doesn't routinely provide this operation.  Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a labiaplasty. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out the operation. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong the doctor's patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? A labiaplasty can be carried out using either a general anaesthetic or a local anaesthetic with sedation. The procedure involves shortening or reshaping the vaginal lips. The unwanted tissue is cut away with a scalpel or possibly a laser, and the loose edge may be stitched up with fine, dissolvable stitches. The whole procedure takes about one to two hours. Some patients are able to go home the same day. Recovery You may need to take some time off work to recover. It can take a couple of months for the skin to fully heal. During this time you need to: keep the area clean and free from infection wear loose underwear and clothes to prevent rubbing avoid sex for a few weeks use sanitary towels instead of tampons for a few weeks Your surgeon would give you more specific advice that you should also follow. Side effects to expect It\u2019s typical after a labiaplasty to have soreness, bruising and swelling for up to two weeks. Peeing and sitting during this period would probably be uncomfortable, although you'd be given painkillers to help with this. What could go wrong A labiaplasty can occasionally result in: bleeding infection scarring of tissue reduced sensitivity of the genitals Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: developing a blood clot in a vein an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, patients find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have a problem Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. If you have a labiaplasty and you experience complications or are unhappy with the results, you should take up the matter with the surgeon who treated you. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the GMC. Who shouldn't have it? A labiaplasty should not be performed on girls younger than 18. Their labia may continue to grow and develop well beyond puberty, into early adulthood. How is it different to female genital mutilation? A labiaplasty is offered as cosmetic surgery or as treatment for a medical problem, with the full consent of the patient. Female genital mutilation (FGM) refers to procedures that intentionally alter or cause injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons. It is nearly always carried out on children without their consent, and in these cases is ethically and morally wrong. FGM is illegal in the UK. More information BAAPS: aesthetic genital surgery  BAPRAS: female genital tract surgery  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 3 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: Is cosmetic surgery right for me?  Vulval pain society  BAAPS: aesthetic genital surgery BAPRAS: female genital tract surgery Is my vagina normal? No two vaginas are the same: find out what's normal and healthy when it comes to size, shape and colour NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Liposuction","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/liposuction.aspx","content":"Liposuction Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Liposuction Liposuction is a cosmetic procedure used to remove unwanted body fat. It involves sucking out small areas of fat that are hard to lose through exercise and a healthy diet. It's carried out on areas of the body where deposits of fat tend to collect, such as the buttocks, hips, thighs and tummy. The aim is to alter body shape, and the results are generally long-lasting, providing you maintain a healthy weight. It works best in people who are a normal weight and in areas where the skin is tight. Liposuction carried out for cosmetic reasons is not normally available on the NHS. However, liposuction can sometimes be used by the NHS to treat certain health conditions (read more about this in \"More information\"). If you're thinking of having liposuction for cosmetic reasons, think very carefully before you go ahead. It can be expensive, the results can't be guaranteed, and there are risks to consider. It\u2019s a good idea to tell your GP first. Be sure that cosmetic surgery is right for you. Read on to find out: How much does it cost? Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Afterwards Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems   Who shouldn't have it More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, liposuction ranges in price from about £2,000 to £6,000, depending on where you go and the body areas being treated. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform liposuction. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out the operation. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many liposuctions they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve?  Liposuction is usually carried out under general anaesthetic, although an epidural anaesthetic may be used for liposuction on lower parts of the body. The surgeon would mark on your body the area where fat is to be removed. He or she would then:  inject this area with a solution containing anaesthetic and medication, to reduce blood loss, bruising and swelling break up the fat cells using high-frequency vibrations, a weak laser pulse or a high-pressure water jet make a small incision (cut) and insert a suction tube attached to a vacuum machine (several cuts may need to be made if the area is large) move the suction tube back and forth to loosen the fat and suck it out drain any excess fluid and blood stitch up and bandage the treated area It usually takes one to three hours. Most people need to stay in hospital overnight. Afterwards After the procedure, you'd be fitted with an elasticated support corset or compression bandages. This helps to reduce swelling and bruising, and should be worn constantly for several weeks after the operation. You may need to take antibiotics straight after the procedure to reduce the risk of infection. Most people also take mild painkillers to ease any pain and swelling. Recovery  It usually takes about two weeks to make a full recovery. If you had a general anaesthetic, someone would need to drive you home and stay with you for the first 24 hours. You wouldn't be able to drive for a few days. If a small area was treated, you may be able to return to work within a few days. If it was a large area, you may need up to 10 days off work to recover. The bandage or corset can be taken off while you shower. You'd need to avoid strenuous activity for up to four weeks (but walking and general movement should be fine). The results of the procedure aren't always noticeable until the swelling has gone down. It can take up to six months for the area to settle completely. After about a week: Stitches would be removed (unless you had dissolvable stitches). At four to six weeks: You should be able to resume any contact sports or strenuous activities you'd normally do. Side effects to expect  It\u2019s common after liposuction to have: bruising and swelling, which may last up to six months numbness, which should go away in six to eight weeks scars inflammation of the treated area, or the veins underneath fluid coming from the cuts swollen ankles (if the legs or ankles are treated) What could go wrong  Liposuction can occasionally result in: lumpy and uneven results bleeding under the skin (haematoma) persistent numbness that lasts for months changes in skin colour in the treated area a build-up of fluid in the lungs (pulmonary oedema) from the fluid injected into the body a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism) damage to internal organs during the procedure Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems   Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you have liposuction and are not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the GMC. Who shouldn't have it Liposuction isn't a treatment for obesity, and it won't remove cellulite or stretch marks. It's only really suitable for people who have tried changing their lifestyle and found this hasn't helped. More information BAAPS: liposuction  NHS Choices: liposuction for lymphoedema  NHS Choices: liposuction for lipoedema  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 10 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: BAAPS: liposuction Liposuction for lymphoedema Liposuction for lipoedema Tummy tuck Surgical fat transfer Is cosmetic surgery right for me? It's a big decision. Ask yourself these questions before deciding whether you want it... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nose job","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/nose-job.aspx","content":"Nose job Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Nose reshaping (rhinoplasty) Nose reshaping (rhinoplasty, or a 'nose job') is an operation to change the shape or size of the nose. It's not usually available on the NHS if done for cosmetic reasons, but may be provided on the NHS if it's needed to help you breathe. Nose reshaping surgery is a delicate, complex operation. The results can\u2019t be guaranteed, there are risks to consider, and it can be expensive. Be sure about your reasons for having it before you go ahead. It's a good idea to discuss your plans with your GP first. You can also read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\" Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost? The cost of nose reshaping in the UK ranges from £4,500 to £7,000. You should also factor in the cost of any consultations, further surgery or follow-up care that may be needed. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a rhinoplasty. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out the rhinoplasty. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? Nose reshaping is usually carried out under general anaesthetic. The surgeon may do any of the following: make the nose smaller (nose reduction), by removing some of the cartilage and bone make the nose larger (nose augmentation), by taking cartilage from the ears and bone from the hips, elbow or skull, and using this to build up the nose (known as a \"graft\") change the nose's shape (including the nostrils), by breaking the nose bone and rearranging the cartilage change the angle between the nose and top lip The skin over the nose should just shrink or expand to its new shape. The operation involves either making one cut across the skin between the nostrils (\"open rhinoplasty\"), or tiny cuts inside the nostrils (\"closed rhinoplasty\").  A closed rhinoplasty leaves no visible scars and causes less swelling, but isn\u2019t always possible or available. Either way, the procedure can take from an hour and a half to three hours. Most people would need to stay in hospital for one or two nights. You\u2019d probably leave hospital with dressings (\"packs\") in each nostril, and a splint held over your nose with tape. You wouldn't be able to breathe through your nose. Painkillers would be given to control any mild pain. Recovery You may need to take up to two weeks off work to recover. It might be several months before you see the full effect of the nose operation, and up to six months for all of the swelling to completely go. You wouldn't be able to drive for a few days after the operation \u2013 your surgeon would advise about this. After about a week: Stitches would be removed (unless you had dissolvable stitches). The splint may be able to come off. At three weeks: Bruises, swelling and redness may have faded. You may be able to swim. At four to six weeks: You may be able to resume contact sports. You\u2019d probably be advised to: prop your head up with pillows for a couple of days when resting, to reduce the swelling avoid hot baths and getting the splint wet avoid blowing your nose or removing any crusts until your appointment to have the splint removed  sneeze through your mouth, to avoid pressure on your nose avoid dusty or smoky places avoid strenuous exercise or contact sports for four to six weeks take paracetamol or another prescribed painkiller to relieve any mild pain Side effects to expect It\u2019s common after nose reshaping to have: a blocked nose \u2013 you\u2019d need to breathe through your mouth for a week or so stiffness and numbness of the nose soreness, swelling and bruising around the eyes, which can last three weeks light nosebleeds for the first few days What could go wrong Nose reshaping surgery can occasionally result in: permanent breathing difficulty damage to the cartilage wall between your nostrils an altered sense of smell heavy nosebleeds Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, patients find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you have a rhinoplasty and are not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information BAAPS: nose reduction and nose augmentation BAPRAS: rhinoplasty  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: How do I choose a surgeon?  BAAPS: nose reduction and nose augmentation BAPRAS: rhinoplasty   Cosmetic surgery abroad Considering going overseas for your op? Make sure you weigh up any potential savings against the potential risks NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tummy tuck","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/tummy-tuck.aspx","content":"Tummy tuck Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Tummy tuck (abdominoplasty) A tummy tuck, or 'abdominoplasty', is cosmetic surgery to improve the shape of the tummy area (abdomen). It can involve removing fat and excess loose skin and tightening the abdominal muscles. The aim is to remove excess tummy skin that can't be removed through exercise - for example, after losing a lot of weight or after pregnancy. But it\u2019s not a quick fix for losing weight. An abdominoplasty is regarded cosmetic surgery, so not normally available on the NHS. If you're thinking of going ahead, make sure you're aware of the cost and the fact that it's major surgery, with risks to consider. Take time to reflect on your decision. It may help to read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\". You can read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems   Who shouldn't have it?  More information  How much does it cost? It costs about £4,500 to £6,000 to have an abdominoplasty in the UK, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may not be included in the price. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a tummy tuck. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out your surgery. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? There are two types of tummy tuck, and both are usually carried out under a general anaesthetic. A partial tummy tuck involves: making a large incision (cut) across the lower tummy separating the skin from the abdominal wall below the tummy button removing excess fat cutting away excess skin pulling together the remaining skin and stitching it in place A full tummy tuck involves: making a large incision across the lower tummy, from hip to hip, just above the pubic area making a second incision to free the belly button from the tissue that surrounds it separating the skin from the abdominal wall realigning the abdominal muscles removing excess fat and skin cutting a new hole for the belly button, and stitching this back in place pulling together the remaining skin and stitching it in place The operation can take between two and five hours. Most people need to stay in hospital for a few nights. A tummy tuck may be quite painful, although pain relief would be provided. You would leave hospital with dressings and a pressure garment (corset) on your tummy, or tummy control pants. Someone would need to drive you home and stay with you for the following 24 hours. Recovery You would need to take about four to six weeks off work and exercise. You wouldn't be able to drive for a few weeks after the operation (your surgeon and insurance company would advise about this). It takes about six weeks to fully recover, and it may be several weeks before you see the full effects of the tummy tuck. You\u2019d need to wear a special type of corset or tummy control pants to encourage your skin to heal properly and reduce any swelling. Generally, you'd need to take it easy for a few weeks and keep your knees bent while in bed, to avoid putting strain on your stitches. After a week or two: A wound check would be carried out At six weeks: Your corset should be able to come off and you'd usually be able to return to most of your normal activities. Side effects to expect You would be left with a scar running across your lower tummy and, if you had a full abdominoplasty, a scar around your belly button. It\u2019s also common after a tummy tuck to: find it difficult to stand up straight \u2013 it will feel like your tummy is being pulled (this will improve over time) have pain and bruises feel numbness in your tummy for a few months to years  have a temporary fluid-filled swelling above the scar have red, raised scars in the first six weeks \u2013 which eventually fade to white What could go wrong A tummy tuck can occasionally result in: thick, obvious scars developing bulges under the skin 'dog ears' (extra skin) at the edges of the scar wounds failing to heal a collection of fluid in the area that was operated on a collection of blood underneath the skin (haematoma) numbness or pain in the tummy or down the leg tummy cramps or pain breathing problems Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic (very rare) The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you have a tummy tuck and are not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with the surgeon who treated you. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). Who shouldn't have it? A tummy tuck is not a procedure for someone who is overweight. If you're overweight, you can read our advice on how to lose weight safely and effectively. If you're not overweight but would like to tone up a flabby tummy, you may be interested in our 10-minute home toning workout and 10-minute abs workout. More information BAAPS: abdominal reduction BAPRAS: tummy tucks  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 5 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: Liposuction  BAAPS: abdominal reduction BAPRAS: tummy tucks News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation  How do I choose a surgeon? Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Costochondritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tietzes-syndrome","content":"Costochondritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Costochondritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Costochondritis   Costochondritis is the medical term for inflammation of the cartilage that joins your ribs to your breastbone (sternum). This area is known as the costochondral joint. Cartilage is tough but flexible connective tissue found throughout the body, including in the joints between bones. It acts as a shock absorber, cushioning the joints. Costochondritis may improve on its own after a few weeks, although it can last for several months or more. The condition doesn't lead to any permanent problems, but may sometimes relapse. Tietze's syndrome Costochondritis may be confused with a separate condition called Tietze's syndrome. Both conditions involve inflammation of the costochondral joint and can cause very similar symptoms. However, Tietze's syndrome is much less common and often causes chest swelling, which may last after any pain and tenderness has gone. Costochondritis also tends to affect adults aged 40 or over, whereas Tietze's syndrome usually affects young adults under 40. As the conditions are very similar, most of the information below also applies to Tietze's syndrome. Signs and symptoms When the costochondral joint becomes inflamed it can result in sharp chest pain and tenderness, which may develop gradually or start suddenly. The pain may be made worse by: a particular posture \u2013 such as lying down pressure on your chest \u2013 such as wearing a seatbelt or hugging someone deep breathing, coughing and sneezing physical activity When to seek medical help It can be difficult to tell the difference between the chest pain associated with costochondritis and pain caused by more serious conditions, such as a heart attack. However, a heart attack usually causes more widespread pain and additional symptoms, such as breathlessness, nausea and sweating. If you, or someone you're with, experiences sudden chest pain and you think there's a possibility it could be a heart attack, dial 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance. If you've had chest pain for a while, don't ignore it. Make an appointment to see your GP so they can investigate the cause. Causes of costochondritis Inflammation is the body's natural response to infection, irritation or injury. It's not known exactly why the costochondral joint becomes inflamed, but in some cases it's been linked to: severe coughing \u2013 which strains your chest area an injury to your chest physical strain from repeated exercise or sudden exertion that you're not used to \u2013 such as moving furniture an infection \u2013 including respiratory tract infections (RTIs) and wound infections wear and tear \u2013 your chest moves in and out 20 to 30 times a minute, and over time this motion can lead to discomfort in these joints Diagnosing costochondritis If you have symptoms of costochondritis, your GP will examine and touch the upper chest area around your costochondral joint. They'll ask you when and where your pain occurs and look at your recent medical history. Before a diagnosis can be confirmed, some tests may need to be carried out to rule out other possible causes of your chest pain. These may include: an electrocardiogram (ECG) \u2013 which records the rhythms and electrical activity of your heart a blood test to check for signs of underlying inflammation a chest X-ray If no other condition is suspected or found, a diagnosis of costrochondritis may be made. Treating costochondritis Costochondritis often gets better after a few weeks, but self-help measures and medication can manage the symptoms. Self-help Costochondritis can be aggravated by any activity that places stress on your chest area, such as strenuous exercise or even simple movements like reaching up to a high cupboard. Any activity that makes the pain in your chest area worse should be avoided until the inflammation in your ribs and cartilage has improved. You may also find it soothing to regularly apply heat to the painful area \u2013 for example, using a cloth or flannel that's been warmed with hot water. Painkillers Painkillers, such as paracetamol, can be used to ease mild to moderate pain. Taking a type of medication called a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) \u2013 such as ibuprofen and naproxen \u2013 two or three times a day can also help control the pain and swelling.  Aspirin is also a suitable alternative, but shouldn't be given to children under 16 years old. These medications are available from pharmacies without a prescription, but you should make sure you carefully read the instructions that come with them before use. NSAIDs aren't suitable for people with certain health conditions, including: asthma stomach ulcers high blood pressure kidney or heart problems Contact your GP if your symptoms get worse despite resting and taking painkillers, as you may benefit from treatment with corticosteroids.  Corticosteroid injections Corticosteroids are powerful medicines that can help reduce pain and swelling. They can be injected into and around your costochondral joint to help relieve the symptoms of costochondritis. Corticosteroid injections may be recommended if your pain is severe, or if NSAIDs are unsuitable or ineffective. They may be given by your GP, or you may need to be referred to a specialist called a rheumatologist. Having too many corticosteroid injections can damage your costochondral joint, so you may only be able to have this type of treatment once every few months if you continue to experience pain. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) TENS is a method of pain relief where a mild electric current is delivered to the affected area using a small, battery-operated device.  The electrical impulses can reduce the pain signals going to the spinal cord and brain, which may help relieve pain and relax muscles. They may also stimulate the production of endorphins, which are the body's natural painkillers. Although TENS may be used to help relieve pain in a wide range of conditions, it doesn't work for everyone. There isn't enough good-quality scientific evidence to say for sure whether TENS is a reliable method of pain relief. Speak to your GP if you're considering TENS. Read more about transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1262 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 704  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 306  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cartilage damage Chest pain Corticosteroids Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Pharmacy and medicines External links The British Pain Society Chest pain Find out about common causes of chest pain, and when you should seek medical advice Medicines out of hours Find out how to access your medicines outside of usual opening hours NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cot death","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Sudden-infant-death-syndrome","content":"Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Sudden-infant-death-syndrome Clinical trials Sudden infant death syndrome Introduction  Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) \u2013 sometimes known as 'cot death' \u2013 is the sudden, unexpected and unexplained death of an apparently healthy baby. In the UK, just under 300 babies die suddenly and unexpectedly every year. This statistic may sound alarming, but SIDS is rare and the risk of your baby dying from it is low. Most deaths happen during the first six months of a baby\u2019s life. Infants born prematurely or with a low birthweight are at greater risk. SIDS also tends to be slightly more common in baby boys. SIDS usually occurs when a baby is asleep, although it can occasionally happen while they're awake. Parents can reduce the risk of SIDS by not smoking while pregnant or after the baby is born, and always placing the baby on their back when they sleep (see below). Find out how to stop smoking.  What causes SIDS? The exact cause of SIDS is unknown, but it's thought to be down to a combination of factors. Experts believe SIDS occurs at a particular stage in a baby\u2019s development, and that it affects babies who are vulnerable to certain environmental stresses. This vulnerability may be caused by being born prematurely or having a low birthweight, or because of other reasons not yet identified.  Environmental stresses could include tobacco smoke, getting tangled in bedding, a minor illness or a breathing obstruction. There's also an association between co-sleeping (sleeping with your baby on a bed, sofa or chair) and SIDS. Babies who die of SIDS are thought to have problems in the way they respond to these stresses and how they regulate their heart rate, breathing and temperature. Although the cause of SIDS isn't fully understood, there are a number of things you can do to reduce the risk. What can I do to help prevent SIDS? Below is a list of things you can do to help prevent SIDS. Do: Always place your baby on their back to sleep. Place your baby in the \"feet to foot\" position (with their feet touching the end of the cot, Moses basket, or pram). Keep your baby\u2019s head uncovered. Their blanket should be tucked in no higher than their shoulders. Let your baby sleep in a cot or Moses basket in the same room as you for the first six months. Use a mattress that's firm, flat, waterproof and in good condition. Breastfeed your baby (if you can). See Why breastfeed? for more information. Don't: Smoke during pregnancy or let anyone smoke in the same room as your baby (both before and after birth). Sleep on a bed, sofa or armchair with your baby. Share a bed with your baby if you or your partner smoke or take drugs, or if you've been drinking alcohol. Let your baby get too hot or too cold. A room temperature of 16-20C, with light bedding or a lightweight baby sleeping bag, will provide a comfortable sleeping environment for your baby. Read more about reducing the risk of SIDS. Seeking medical advice if your baby is unwell Babies often have minor illnesses, which you don't need to worry about. Give your baby plenty of fluids to drink and don't let them get too hot. If you're worried about your baby at any point, see your GP or call NHS 111 for advice. Dial 999 for an ambulance if your baby: stops breathing or turns blue is struggling for breath  is unconscious or seems unaware of what's going on won\u2019t wake up has a fit for the first time, even if they seem to recover Read more about spotting signs of serious illness in children. Support services If a baby dies suddenly and unexpectedly, there will need to be an investigation into how and why they died. A post-mortem examination will usually be necessary, which can be very distressing for the family. The police and healthcare professionals work closely to investigate unexpected infant deaths and ensure the family is supported. They should be able to put you in touch with local sources of help and support. Many people find talking to others who have had similar experiences helps them to cope with their bereavement. The Lullaby Trust provides advice and support for bereaved families. Specially trained advisers are available on their helpline. The number is 0808 802 6868 and it's open Monday to Friday (10am-5pm), and at weekends and public holidays (6pm-10pm). You can also visit their website for further information and support if you are bereaved. The Babyloss and Sands websites are useful resources for those affected by the death of a baby during pregnancy, at birth or shortly afterwards. Read more about bereavement. Information about your child If your baby was affected by SIDS, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 14\/09\/2015 Next review due: 14\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 90 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Bereavement: coping with grief after a neonatal death Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An expert discusses neonatal death, when a baby dies within 28 days of being born. David and Leigh's twins Kristina and Lucy were born prematurely at 25 weeks and died aged 17 and 21 days. They describe how they grieved and coped in their own way. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Babies who need special care Reducing the risk of cot death Your baby's bedding External links Babyloss The Lullaby Trust Stillbirth & neonatal death charity (Sands) Helping your baby to sleep Tips to help your baby sleep, including where they should sleep and establishing a routine Coping with bereavement A bereavement counsellor explains what bereavement is, how to cope and where to go for help and support NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Couch to 5K","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/LiveWell\/c25k\/Pages\/couch-to-5k.aspx","content":"Couch to 5K - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Couch to 5K Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus 'Running helps manage my blood pressure' Andrew took up running after a routine medical check-up revealed he had high blood pressure. Couch to 5K: tips for new runners Expert advice to get you started on the Couch to 5K running plan, including what to wear, warming up and nutrition. 'My family's deaths were a wake-up call' Helen Cleary took up running after losing her father and brother to heart disease. Mother and son bond over love for running C25K graduate Julia tells how a shared passion for running brought her closer to her son. 'I took up running after losing a friend' Father-of-two Aftab says he discovered running after losing a close friend through a heart attack. \u2018I struggled to get out of the bath before C25K\u2019 Loraine tells how she dropped three dress sizes after starting the Couch to 5K running plan. Get running with Couch to 5K Our C25K plan is designed to get just about anyone off the couch and running 5km in nine weeks. How to run correctly 10 tips to improve your running technique and help you run faster over longer distances and avoid injury. Do I need to stretch before exercising? Whether you're a weekend warrior or competitive athlete, find out what the science says about the benefits of stretching. How to stretch after a run Stretching exercises to do after a run to gradually cool down and improve your flexibility. 'Running gives me a sense of achievement' Lorraine is one of hundreds of Couch to 5K graduates who have signed up to parkrun. Couch to 5K: week by week A week-by-week description of the nine-week Couch to 5K podcasts. My Couch to 5K diary A runner's diary charting the highs and lows of the nine-week Couch to 5K plan for beginners. 'Couch to 5K got me off the sofa' Laura was a fitness phobe before she discovered the Couch to 5K running programme. Life after Couch to 5K Great tips to keep you motivated once you've completed the Couch to 5K running programme. Find a run near you Use our race finder to find a run near you to set your next challenge and stay motivated. 'Couch to 5K helped me lose weight' Andy Stevenson was looking for an exercise to lose weight and get fit and found Couch to 5K was just the ticket 'We took on the 5x50 fitness challenge' Couch to 5K graduates tell how they teamed up online to take on the mighty 5x50 challenge. 'Our Couch to 5K journeys' Christine and Stewart Logie share their experiences of taking part in the Couch to 5K running programme. Running to music Running to music can help you run more efficiently and for longer. Find out how to create your own playlist. Running podcasts for C25K graduates Take your running to the next level with new podcasts for Couch to 5K graduates. Knee exercises for runners Knee exercises to help you run better, run pain-free and avoid knee pain. Interval training for runners Find out how you can use interval training to improve your running speed. Knee pain and other running injuries The five most common running injuries, what to do if you get one, and how to prevent getting injured. 'How I caught the running bug' Aimee never enjoyed exercise until she started running. She tells us what keeps her going. 'Strength and Flex made me a better runner' Father-of-two Cliff Hobby tells how Strength and Flex improved his running. Overcoming the barriers to exercise Find out the most common barriers to exercise and get advice on how to overcome them. 'C25K boosted my self-confidence' Angela Sherwin, 42, says the Couch to 5K running plan has improved her self-confidence. Running in winter Don't let cold weather put you off running. Use these tips to stay on track in winter. Find a Race Ready for a challenge? Of course you are! Enter your location below to search thousands of races and find the right event for you. Community content from HealthUnlocked 5K+ running podcasts Improve your running with these podcasts for Couch to 5K graduates Fitness Studio NHS Fitness Studio video workouts enable you to get fit for free in the comfort of your own home Strength and Flex Download our Strength and flexibility podcast series and get a free personal trainer 12-week fitness plan A 12-week exercise plan for beginners combining running and strength and flexibility workouts Weight loss guide Lose weight the healthy way and learn the skills to keep it off with our 12-week weight loss guide Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cough","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cough","content":"Cough - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cough  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cough Clinical trials Cough Introduction  A cough is a reflex action to clear your airways of mucus and irritants such as dust or smoke. It's rarely a sign of anything serious. A \"dry cough\" means it's tickly and doesn't produce any phlegm (thick mucus). A \"chesty cough\" means phlegm is produced to help clear your airways. Most coughs clear up within three weeks and don't require any treatment. For more persistent coughs, it's a good idea to see your GP so they can investigate the cause. Find out when to see your GP. What can cause a cough? Some of the main causes of short-term (acute) and persistent (chronic) coughs are outlined below. Short-term coughs Common causes of a short-term cough include: an upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) that affects the throat, windpipe or sinuses \u2013 examples are a cold, flu, laryngitis, sinusitis or whooping cough a lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) that affects your lungs or lower airways \u2013 examples are acute bronchitis or pneumonia an allergy, such as allergic rhinitis or hay fever a flare-up of a long-term condition such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or chronic bronchitis inhaled dust or smoke   In rare cases, a short-term cough may be the first sign of a health condition that causes a persistent cough. Persistent coughs A persistent cough may be caused by: a long-term respiratory tract infection, such as chronic bronchitis   asthma \u2013 this also usually causes other symptoms, such as wheezing, chest tightness and shortness of breath an allergy smoking \u2013 a smoker's cough can also be a symptom of COPD bronchiectasis \u2013 where the airways of the lungs become abnormally widened postnasal drip \u2013 mucus dripping down the throat from the back of the nose, caused by a condition such as rhinitis or sinusitis gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) \u2013 where the throat becomes irritated by leaking stomach acid a prescribed medicine, such as an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE inhibitor), which is used to treat high blood pressure and cardiovascular disease Rarely, a persistent cough can be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as lung cancer, heart failure, a pulmonary embolism (blood clot on the lung) or tuberculosis.  Coughs in children Coughs in children often have similar causes to those mentioned above. For example, respiratory tract infections, asthma and GORD can all affect children. Causes of coughs that are more common in children than adults include: bronchiolitis \u2013 a mild respiratory tract infection that usually causes cold-like symptoms croup \u2013 this causes a distinctive barking cough and a harsh sound known as stridor when the child breathes in whooping cough \u2013 look out for symptoms such as intense, hacking bouts of coughing, vomiting, and a \"whoop\" sound with each sharp intake of breath after coughing Occasionally, a persistent cough in a child can be a sign of a serious long-term condition, such as cystic fibrosis. When to see your GP There's usually no need to see your GP if you or your child have a mild cough for a week or two. However, you should seek medical advice if: you've had a cough for more than three weeks your cough is particularly severe or is getting worse you cough up blood or experience shortness of breath, breathing difficulties or chest pain you have any other worrying symptoms, such as unexplained weight loss, a persistent change in your voice, or lumps or swellings in your neck If your GP is unsure what's causing your cough, they may refer you to a hospital specialist for an assessment. They may also request some tests, such as a chest X-ray, allergy tests, breathing tests, and an analysis of a sample of your phlegm to check for infection. What treatments are available? Treatment isn't always necessary for mild, short-term coughs because it's likely to be a viral infection that will get better on its own within a few weeks. You can look after yourself at home by resting, drinking plenty of fluids, and taking painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. Cough medicines and remedies Although some people find them helpful, medicines that claim to suppress your cough or stop you bringing up phlegm are not usually recommended. This is because there's little evidence to suggest they're any more effective than simple home remedies, and they're not suitable for everyone. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) recommends that over-the-counter cough and cold medicines shouldn't be given to children under the age of six. Children aged 6 to 12 should only use them on the advice of a doctor or pharmacist. A homemade remedy containing honey and lemon is likely to be just as useful and safer to take. Honey shouldn't be given to babies under the age of one because of the risk of infant botulism. Treating the underlying cause If your cough has a specific cause, treating this may help. For example: asthma can be treated with inhaled steroids to reduce inflammation in your airways allergies can be treated by avoiding things you're allergic to and taking antihistamines to dampen down your allergic reactions bacterial infections can be treated with antibiotics GORD can be treated with antacids to neutralise your stomach acid and medication to reduce the amount of acid your stomach produces COPD can be treated with bronchodilators to widen your airways If you smoke, quitting is also likely to help improve your cough. Read more about stopping smoking. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 01\/05\/2015 Next review due: 01\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1396 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 601  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 377  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 222  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Coughs Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Watch how a GP describes the most common causes of coughs and how they can be treated. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Asthma Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Cold Flu Whooping cough External links Be Clear on Cancer: lung cancer British Lung Foundation Kids: coughs, colds and ear infections What to do when your child has a minor illness such as a cough, cold, sore throat or ear infection Colds and flu: fact vs fiction Does taking vitamin C or echinacea really protect you against colds? Can getting cold give you the flu? NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Coughing up blood","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/coughing-up-blood","content":"Coughing up blood - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coughing up blood (blood in phlegm)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coughing up blood Introduction  Coughing up blood can be alarming, but isn't usually a sign of a serious problem if you're young and otherwise healthy. It's more a cause for concern in older people, particularly those who smoke. The medical term for coughing up blood is haemoptysis. You may cough up small amounts of bright red blood, or frothy blood-streaked sputum (saliva and phlegm). The blood is usually from your lungs and is often the result of prolonged coughing or a chest infection. If the blood is dark and contains bits of food or what look like coffee grounds, it may be coming from your digestive system. This is a more serious problem and you should go to hospital straight away. Read more about vomiting blood. What to do if you cough up blood See your GP as soon as possible if you cough up blood. It's particularly important to see your GP if: you cough up more than a few teaspoons of blood you also have chest pain, dizziness, fever, light-headedness or worsening shortness of breath you have a loss of appetite or unexplained weight loss there's also blood in your urine or blood in your stools Your GP will be able to assess whether you may have a serious medical condition that needs to be investigated and treated. Call NHS 111 or your local out of hours service if you can't see your GP. Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department immediately if you're coughing up significant amounts of blood or are struggling to breathe. Tests that may be needed You may be asked for a sample of your sputum so it can be checked for infection. Other tests, such as blood tests, may also be needed. Your GP may decide to refer you to a specialist at your local hospital for a chest X-ray or a more detailed scan, such as a computerised tomography (CT) scan. In some cases, further tests may be required to find out where the blood is coming from. For example, you may be referred to a specialist who may decide to arrange a test called a bronchoscopy (where the main air passages of your lungs are examined using a tube with a camera at one end). This page can give you a better idea of what the cause may be, but don't use it to diagnose yourself. Always leave that to a doctor. Common causes of coughing up blood The most common reasons for coughing up blood are: a prolonged, severe cough a chest infection \u2013 this is more likely if your sputum is discoloured or contains pus, you have a fever, or you have a tight feeling in your chest bronchiectasis \u2013 this is more likely if you're also wheezy or short of breath Sometimes a severe nosebleed or bleeding from the mouth or throat can cause blood to come out in your saliva when you cough. Less common causes of coughing up blood Less commonly, coughing up blood may be the result of: pulmonary embolism (a blood clot in the lungs) \u2013 this usually causes sudden shortness of breath and chest pain pulmonary oedema (fluid in the lungs) \u2013 your sputum will be pink and frothy, and this usually occurs in people with pre-existing heart problems lung cancer \u2013 this is more likely if you're over 40 and smoke tuberculosis (TB) \u2013 a severe lung infection associated with fever and sweating; this is becoming more common in the UK, but can be treated with prolonged antibiotics  cancer of the throat or windpipe taking anticoagulants \u2013 medications that help stop your blood clotting, such as warfarin, rivaroxaban, or dabigatran Sometimes, no cause can be found and it never happens again. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/08\/2015 Next review due: 28\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 939 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 505  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 268  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 82  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bronchiectasis Chest infection Cough Vomiting blood External links British Lung Foundation Call your GP today If you've been coughing for 3 weeks or more, tell your doctor. Call your GP today Chest infection Symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of chest infections in adults Vomiting blood See your GP immediately if you vomit blood. Read up on the possible causes... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Counselling","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Counselling","content":"Counselling - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Counselling  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Reuters news Counselling Overview Counselling Clinical trials Counselling Counselling Mental health news Introduction  Counselling is a type of talking therapy that allows a person to talk about their problems and feelings in a confidential and dependable environment. A counsellor is trained to listen with empathy (by putting themselves in your shoes). They can help you deal with any negative thoughts and feelings you have. Sometimes the term \"counselling\" is used to refer to talking therapies in general, but counselling is also a type of therapy in its own right. Other psychological therapies include psychotherapy, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), and relationship therapy, which could be between members of a family, a couple, or work colleagues. Read more about other psychological therapies. What is counselling used for? Talking therapies such as counselling can be used to help with many different mental health conditions, including: depression  anxiety  borderline personality disorder (BPD) obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) long-term illnesses eating disorders, such as anorexia and bulimia drug misuse  How counselling can help Counselling aims to help you deal with and overcome issues that are causing emotional pain or making you feel uncomfortable. It can provide a safe and regular space for you to talk and explore difficult feelings. The counsellor is there to support you and respect your views. They won't usually give advice, but will help you find your own insights into and understanding of your problems. Counselling can help you: cope with a bereavement or relationship breakdown cope with redundancy or work-related stress explore issues such as sexual identity deal with issues preventing you achieving your ambitions deal with feelings of depression or sadness, and have a more positive outlook on life deal with feelings of anxiety, helping you worry less about things  understand yourself and your problems better feel more confident develop a better understanding of other people's points of view Counselling can often involve talking about difficult or painful feelings and, as you begin to face them, you may feel worse in some ways. However, with the help and support of your therapist, you should gradually start to feel better. In most cases, it takes a number of sessions before the counselling starts to make a difference, and a regular commitment is required to make the best use of the therapy. What to expect from counselling During your counselling sessions, you'll be encouraged to express your feelings and emotions. By discussing your concerns with you, the counsellor can help you gain a better understanding of your feelings and thought processes, as well as identifying ways of finding your own solutions to problems. It can be a great relief to share your worries and fears with someone who acknowledges your feelings and is able to help you reach a positive solution. Counselling can take place: face to face individually or in a group over the phone by email using a specialised computer programme You may be offered counselling as a single session, as a short course of sessions over a few weeks or months, or as a longer course that lasts for several months or years. Trusting your counsellor A good counsellor will focus on you and listen without judging or criticising you. They may help you find out about how you could deal with your problems, but they shouldn't tell you what to do. For counselling to be effective, you need to build a trusting and safe relationship with your counsellor. If you feel that you and your counsellor aren't getting on, or that you're not getting the most out of your sessions, you should discuss this with them, or you can look for another counsellor. If you're seeing an NHS counsellor attached to your GP surgery, your GP may be able to arrange for you to see another NHS counsellor. Alternatively, you could pay to see a private counsellor. Many counsellors and counselling organisations offer a sliding scale of fees where the more sessions you have, the cheaper it becomes. Who provides counselling? As counselling involves talking about sensitive issues and revealing personal thoughts and feelings, your counsellor should be experienced and professionally qualified. Different healthcare professionals may be trained in counselling or qualified to provide psychological therapies. These include: counsellors \u2013 trained to provide counselling to help you cope better with your life and any issues you have clinical and counselling psychologists \u2013 healthcare professionals who specialise in assessing and treating mental health conditions using evidence-based psychological therapies psychiatrists \u2013 qualified medical doctors who've received further training in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions psychotherapists \u2013 similar to counsellors, but they've usually received more extensive training; they're also often qualified applied psychologists or psychiatrists cognitive behavioural psychotherapists \u2013 may come from a variety of professional backgrounds and have received training in cognitive behaviour therapy; they should be registered and accredited with the British Association for Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies (BABCP) Availability In 2010 the government announced plans to make psychological therapies widely available on the NHS. This is because they've been shown to be effective treatments for common mental health conditions. The programme is called Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT). As a result of the IAPT programme, evidence-based psychological therapies can now be accessed through: GP surgeries the workplace \u2013 most workplaces now offer access to a counselling service, sometimes in-house but more often through an Employee Assistance Scheme universities, schools and colleges \u2013 UK universities and many further education colleges provide an in-house counselling service for their students; school-based counselling is universal in Wales and Northern Ireland, but provision is more patchy throughout the rest of the UK some voluntary and charitable organisations  IAPT services offer a range of psychological therapies, including individual and group-based therapy. While a group may seem a bit intimidating at first, many people find that once they've overcome this worry, they really benefit from sharing and meeting with other people. If you're referred for counselling or another psychological therapy through the NHS, it will be free of charge. However, your choice of the type of therapy may be limited. If you have a preference for the type of therapy you receive, or the time or location of your appointments, you may choose to look for a private therapist. If you decide to pay to see a private therapist, make sure they're qualified and you feel comfortable with them. The cost of private counselling can vary considerably. Depending on where you live, a session can cost between £10 and £70. Some therapists may be willing to adjust their fees in accordance with your income. Many private counsellors offer an initial free session and concessionary rates for students, job seekers and those on low wages. You should ask about charges and agree a price before starting a course of counselling. Charities and voluntary organisations Some charities and voluntary organisations also offer counselling. These organisations usually specialise in a particular area, such as couples counselling, bereavement, or family guidance. Charities that may offer counselling include: Cruse Bereavement Care \u2013 provides bereavement advice and support Relate \u2013 offers relationship advice and counselling Rape Crisis \u2013 for women and girls who've been raped or sexually abused Victim Support \u2013 provides victims and witnesses of crime with help and support You may also be able to access support groups through your local community, church, or social services. Finding a qualified counsellor Most reputable counsellors will be registered with a professional organisation that has been accredited by the Professional Standards Authority (PSA) (a government body), such as the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP) or The National Counselling Society. Counselling and clinical psychologists must be registered with the Health & Care Professions Council (HCPC), and may also be chartered with The British Psychological Society (BPS). The British Association for Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies (BABCP) maintains a list of accredited CBT practitioners. Therapists registered with a professional association have met the PSA's high standards for governance, standard setting, education and training, information, management and complaints. They must also maintain high ethical and professional standards. This gives the public greater protection, and guarantees a minimum level of training and continuing professional development. You can find a therapist near you by using the postcode search on the BACP website. Attitudes to therapy In 2014 the BACP carried out some research to find out more about people's attitudes towards counselling and psychotherapy. Some of the key findings included: 28% of people have consulted a counsellor or psychotherapist (up from 21% in 2010) 54% of respondents said that they, a family member, friend or work colleague have consulted a counsellor or psychotherapist 69% of people think the world would be a better place if people talked about their feelings more Read more about the key findings of the BACP research (PDF, 134kb). Mental and emotional health: talking therapies Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Learn about different talking therapies that can help people overcome a range of problems, from depression to stress. Tip: check with your GP whether there are any Improving Access to Psychological Treatment (IAPT) services in your area. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/11\/2014 Next review due: 26\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 326 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anxiety Benefits of talking therapy Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Depression Find psychological therapy services (IAPT) Mental health helplines Psychotherapy Self-help therapies External links Big White Wall BACP: counselling and psychotherapy Living Life to the Full Maytree: a sanctuary for the suicidal MoodGym The National Counselling Society Relate: relationship counselling Samaritans UK Council for Psychotherapy (UKCP) The Headroom - Therapist Matching Service Welldoing Counselling Directory Low mood and depression How to know the difference between feeling low and being depressed, when to see your GP, and what help is available Talking therapies explained A guide to the different types of talking therapy and how they can help you Finding a therapist What to look for in a counsellor or therapist and how to benefit from your sessions NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cognitive behavioural therapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cognitive-behavioural-therapy","content":"Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cognitive-behavioural-therapy Real stories Cognitive-behavioural-therapy Clinical trials Cognitive behavioural therapy Cognitive-behavioural-therapy How it works   Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a talking therapy that can help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and behave. It's most commonly used to treat anxiety and depression, but can be useful for other mental and physical health problems. This topic covers: How it works Uses What happens during a session Pros and cons Finding a therapist How CBT works CBT is based on the concept that your thoughts, feelings, physical sensations and actions are interconnected, and that negative thoughts and feelings can trap you in a vicious cycle. CBT aims to help you deal with overwhelming problems in a more positive way by breaking them down into smaller parts. You're shown how to change these negative patterns to improve the way you feel. Unlike some other talking treatments, CBT deals with your current problems, rather than focusing on issues from your past. It looks for practical ways to improve your state of mind on a daily basis. Read more about how CBT works. Uses for CBT CBT has been shown to be an effective way of treating a number of different mental health conditions. In addition to depression or anxiety disorders, CBT can also help people with: obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)  panic disorder post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) phobias eating disorders \u2013 such as anorexia and bulimia sleep problems \u2013 such as insomnia problems related to alcohol misuse CBT is also sometimes used to treat people with long-term health conditions, such as: irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) Although CBT can't cure the physical symptoms of these conditions, it can help people cope better with their symptoms. What happens during CBT sessions If CBT is recommended, you'll usually have a session with a therapist once a week or once every two weeks. The course of treatment usually lasts for between five and 20 sessions, with each session lasting 30-60 minutes. During the sessions, you'll work with your therapist to break down your problems into their separate parts \u2013 such as your thoughts, physical feelings and actions. You and your therapist will analyse these areas to work out if they're unrealistic or unhelpful and to determine the effect they have on each other and on you. Your therapist will then be able to help you work out how to change unhelpful thoughts and behaviours. After working out what you can change, your therapist will ask you to practise these changes in your daily life and you'll discuss how you got on during the next session. The eventual aim of therapy is to teach you to apply the skills you've learnt during treatment to your daily life. This should help you manage your problems and stop them having a negative impact on your life \u2013 even after your course of treatment finishes. Pros and cons of CBT Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) can be as effective as medication in treating some mental health problems, but it may not be successful or suitable for everyone. Some of the advantages of CBT include: it may be helpful in cases where medication alone hasn't worked it can be completed in a relatively short period of time compared to other talking therapies the highly structured nature of CBT means it can be provided in different formats, including in groups, self-help books and computer programs it teaches you useful and practical strategies that can be used in everyday life \u2013 even after the treatment has finished Some of the disadvantages of CBT to consider include: you need to commit yourself to the process to get the most from it \u2013 a therapist can help and advise you, but they need your co-operation attending regular CBT sessions and carrying out any extra work between sessions can take up a lot of your time it may not be suitable for people with more complex mental health needs or learning difficulties \u2013 as it requires structured sessions it involves confronting your emotions and anxieties \u2013 you may experience initial periods where you're anxious or emotionally uncomfortable it focuses on the individual\u2019s capacity to change themselves (their thoughts, feelings and behaviours) \u2013 which doesn't address any wider problems in systems or families that often have a significant impact on an individual\u2019s health and wellbeing Some critics also argue that because CBT only addresses current problems and focuses on specific issues, it doesn't address the possible underlying causes of mental health conditions, such as an unhappy childhood. Finding a CBT therapist If you think you have a problem that may benefit from treatment with CBT, the first step is usually to speak to your GP.  Your GP may be able to refer you for CBT that's free on the NHS, although you may have to wait.  Find psychological therapy services. If you can afford it, you can choose to pay for your therapy privately. The cost of private therapy sessions varies, but it's usually £40-100 per session. If you're considering having CBT privately, ask your GP if they can suggest a local therapist. The British Association for Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies (BABCP) keeps a register of all accredited therapists in the UK and The British Psychological Society (BPS) has a directory of chartered psychologists, some of whom specialise in CBT. Page last reviewed: 15\/07\/2016 Next review due: 15\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1199 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 461  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 328  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 250  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Stress, anxiety and depression Generalised anxiety disorder Clinical depression OCD Panic disorder Phobias Counselling Psychotherapy External links Mental Health Foundation: talking therapies Rethink Mental Illness Mind BABCP: CBT Royal College of Psychiatrists: CBT British Psychological Society Mental health services Find out what mental health services exist and how to access them Benefits of talking therapy Find out about counselling and talking therapies, and how they can help Can I get free therapy or counselling? Find out whether you can get counselling free on the NHS, and how to access it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find therapy and counselling services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=TherapyAndCounsellingServices","content":"Find Psychological therapies (IAPT) services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Psychological therapies (IAPT) services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psychotherapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Psychotherapy","content":"Psychotherapy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Psychotherapy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Psychotherapy Clinical trials Psychotherapy Psychotherapy How it works Psychotherapy Availability Introduction  Psychotherapy is a type of therapy used to treat emotional problems and mental health conditions. It involves talking to a trained therapist, either one-to-one, in a group or with your wife, husband or partner. It allows you to look deeper into your problems and worries, and deal with troublesome habits and a wide range of mental disorders, such as depression and schizophrenia. Psychotherapy usually involves talking, but sometimes other methods may be used \u2013 for example, art, music, drama and movement. Psychotherapy can help you discuss feelings you have about yourself and other people, particularly family and those close to you. In some cases, couples or families are offered joint therapy sessions together. You will meet your therapist regularly, usually once a week, for several months, or sometimes even years. Individual sessions last about 50 minutes, but group sessions are often a bit longer. Read more about how psychotherapy works. Psychotherapists Psychotherapists are mental health professionals who are trained to listen to a person's problems to try to find out what's causing them and help them find a solution. As well as listening and discussing important issues with you, a psychotherapist can suggest strategies for resolving problems and, if necessary, help you change your attitudes and behaviour. Some therapists teach specific skills to help you tolerate painful emotions, manage relationships more effectively, or improve behaviour. You may also be encouraged to develop your own solutions. In group therapy, the members support each other with advice and encouragement. A therapist will treat sessions as confidential. This means you can trust them with information that may be personal or embarrassing. What is psychotherapy used to treat? Psychotherapy can be used to treat a wide range of mental health conditions, including:  depression  anxiety disorders  borderline personality disorder (BPD)   obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)   post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  long-term illnesses eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa, bulimia and binge eating drug misuse People with significant emotional problems may also benefit from psychotherapy, including people dealing with stress, bereavement, divorce, redundancy, or relationship problems. Types of psychotherapy Several different types of psychotherapy are available. These include: psychodynamic (psychoanalytic) psychotherapy \u2013 a psychoanalytic therapist will encourage you to say whatever is going through your mind. This will help you become aware of hidden meanings or patterns in what you do or say that may be contributing to your problems. cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) \u2013 a form of psychotherapy that examines how beliefs and thoughts are linked to behaviour and feelings. It teaches skills that retrain your behaviour and style of thinking to help you deal with stressful situations. cognitive analytical therapy (CAT) \u2013 uses methods from both psychodynamic psychotherapy and CBT to work out how your behaviour causes problems, and how to improve it through self-help and experimentation. interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) \u2013 looks at the way an illness can be triggered by events involving relationships with others, such as bereavements, disputes or relocation. It helps you cope with the feelings involved, as well as work out coping strategies. humanistic therapies \u2013 encourage you to think about yourself more positively and aim to improve your self-awareness. family and couple (systemic) therapy \u2013 therapy with other members of your family that aims to help you work out problems together. The type of therapy that's most suitable for you will depend on the problem you have. Read more about how psychotherapy works. How can I get psychotherapy? If you think you might benefit from psychotherapy, the best place to start is with your GP. In some cases, it may be possible for your GP or another healthcare professional to refer you a qualified psychotherapist for free treatment on the NHS. However, waiting lists for NHS treatment are often long. Alternatively, you might choose to pay for private treatment. In these cases, it's important to make sure your therapist is registered with a recognised professional organisation and to be aware of the costs involved. Typically, a 50-minute one-to-one session can range from £40 to £100. Read more about the availability of psychotherapy. Finding psychotherapy services When looking for a psychotherapist, make sure they're fully qualified and, if appropriate, that they have experience of treating your specific condition. You can search the directory of psychological therapy services to find what's available in your area. Your GP may also be able to recommend a local qualified psychotherapist, or you can check the registers of the various organisations of registered psychotherapists. For example, the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP) can help you find a therapist, as can the UK Council for Psychotherapy (UKCP). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/04\/2015 Next review due: 14\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 125 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Can I get free therapy or counselling? Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Counselling Depression Find psychological therapy services Psychiatry Self-help therapies External links British Association for Counselling & Psychotherapy British Psychoanalytic Council (BPC): psychoanalytic psychotherapy Counselling Directory: find a psychotherapist Mental Health Foundation Mind Royal College of Psychiatry: psychotherapies UK Council for Psychotherapy The Headroom - Therapist Matching Service Welldoing: find a therapist Benefits of talking therapy Find out about counselling and talking therapies, and how they can help Free audio guides to boost your mood Eight Moodzone mental wellbeing audio guides designed to help you better understand the problems you may be facing in your life Benefits of talking therapy Find out about counselling and talking therapies, and how they can help Find psychological therapy services Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CPR","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Accidents-and-first-aid","content":"First aid - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories First aid  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Accidents-and-first-aid Clinical trials First aid Accidents-and-first-aid After an incident Accidents-and-first-aid CPR Accidents-and-first-aid Recovery position Introduction  Every year in the UK, thousands of people die or are seriously injured in incidents. Many deaths could be prevented if first aid is given before emergency services arrive. What to do If someone is injured you should: first check that you and the casualty aren't in any danger, and, if possible, make the situation safe if necessary, dial 999 or 112 for an ambulance when it's safe to do so carry out basic first aid Read more about what to do after an incident. If someone is unconscious and breathing If a person is unconscious but breathing, and has no other injuries that would stop them being moved, place them in the recovery position until help arrives. Keep them under observation to ensure they continue to breathe normally, and don't obstruct their airway. If someone is unconscious and not breathing If a person isn't breathing normally after an incident, call an ambulance and start CPR straight away. Use hands-only CPR if you aren't trained to perform rescue breaths. Read more about CPR, including instructions and a video about hands-only CPR. Common accidents and emergencies Below, in alphabetical order, are some of the most common injuries that need emergency treatment in the UK and information about how to deal with them: anaphylaxis (or anaphylactic shock) bleeding burns and scalds   choking  drowning  electric shock (domestic)  fractures  heart attack  poisoning  shock  stroke Anaphylaxis Anaphylaxis (or anaphylactic shock) is a severe allergic reaction that can occur after an insect sting or after eating certain foods. The adverse reaction can be very fast, occurring within seconds or minutes of coming into contact with the substance the person is allergic to (allergen). During anaphylactic shock, it may be difficult for the person to breathe, as their tongue and throat may swell, obstructing their airway. Call 999 or 112 immediately if you think someone is experiencing anaphylactic shock. Check if the person is carrying any medication. Some people who know they have severe allergies may carry an adrenaline self-injector, which is a type of pre-loaded syringe. You can either help the person administer their medication or, if you're trained to do so, give it to them yourself. After the injection, continue to look after the person until medical help arrives. All casualties who have had an intramuscular or subcutaneous (under the skin) injection of adrenaline must be seen and medically checked by a healthcare professional as soon as possible after the injection has been given. Make sure they're comfortable and can breathe as best they can while waiting for medical help to arrive. If they're conscious, sitting upright is normally the best position for them. Read more about treating anaphylaxis. Bleeding If someone is bleeding heavily, the main aim is to prevent further blood loss and minimise the effects of shock (see below). First, dial 999 and ask for an ambulance as soon as possible. If you have disposable gloves, use them to reduce the risk of any infection being passed on. Check that there's nothing embedded in the wound. If there is, take care not to press down on the object. Instead, press firmly on either side of the object and build up padding around it before bandaging, to avoid putting pressure on the object itself. If nothing is embedded: apply and maintain pressure to the wound with your gloved hand, using a clean pad or dressing if possible; continue to apply pressure until the bleeding stops  use a clean dressing to bandage the wound firmly if bleeding continues through the pad, apply pressure to the wound  until the bleeding stops and then apply another pad over the top and bandage it in place; don't remove the original pad or dressing, but continue to check that the bleeding has stopped  If a body part, such as a finger, has been severed, place it in a plastic bag or wrap it in cling film and make sure it goes with the casualty to hospital. Always seek medical help for bleeding unless it's minor. If someone has a nosebleed that hasn't stopped after 20 minutes, go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department. Read more about how to treat minor bleeding from cuts and grazes and how to treat nosebleeds. Haemostatic dressings and tourniquets In certain situations, where bleeding is very severe and from the body\u2019s extremities, such as the head, neck and torso, it may be appropriate to use haemostatic dressings or a tourniquet. Haemostatic dressings contain properties that help the blood to clot (thicken) quicker. A tourniquet is a band that's wrapped tightly around a limb to stop blood loss. Haemostatic dressings and tourniquets should only be used by people who have been trained to apply them. Burns and scalds If someone has a burn or scald: cool the burn as quickly as possible with cool running water for at least 10 minutes, or until the pain is relieved call 999 or seek medical help, if needed while cooling the burn, carefully remove any clothing or jewellery, unless it's attached to the skin if you're cooling a large burnt area, particularly in babies, children and elderly people, be aware that it may cause hypothermia (it may be necessary to stop cooling the burn to avoid hypothermia)  cover the burn loosely with cling film; if cling film isn't available, use a clean, dry dressing or non-fluffy material; don't wrap the burn tightly, because swelling may lead to further injury don't apply creams, lotions or sprays to the burn For chemical burns, wear protective gloves, remove any affected clothing, and rinse the burn with cool running water for at least 20 minutes to wash out the chemical. If possible, determine the cause of the injury. In certain situations where a chemical is regularly handled, a specific chemical antidote may be available to use. Be careful not to contaminate and injure yourself with the chemical, and wear protective clothing if necessary. Call 999 or 112 for immediate medical help. Read more about how to treat burns and scalds. Choking The information below is for choking in adults and children over one year old. Read what to do if a baby under one year old is choking. Mild choking If the airway is only partly blocked, the person will usually be able to speak, cry, cough or breathe. In situations like this, a person will usually be able to clear the blockage themselves. If choking is mild: encourage the person to cough to try to clear the blockage ask them to try to spit out the object if it\u2019s in their mouth don't put your fingers in their mouth to help them because they may accidentally bite you If coughing doesn\u2019t work, start back blows (see below). Severe choking  If choking is severe, the person won\u2019t be able to speak, cry, cough or breathe, and without help they\u2019ll eventually become unconscious. To help an adult or child over one year old: Stand behind the person and slightly to one side. Support their chest with one hand. Lean the person forward so that the object blocking their airway will come out of their mouth, rather than moving further down. Give up to five sharp blows between the person\u2019s shoulder blades with the heel of your hand (the heel is between the palm of your hand and your wrist). Check if the blockage has cleared. If not, give up to five abdominal thrusts (see below). Abdominal thrusts shouldn't be used on babies under one year old, pregnant women or obese people. To perform abdominal thrusts on a person who is severely choking and isn\u2019t in one of the above groups: Stand behind the person who is choking. Place your arms around their waist and bend them well forward. Clench one fist and place it just above the person's belly button. Place your other hand on top of your fist and pull sharply inwards and upwards. Repeat this up to five times. The aim is to get the obstruction out with each chest thrust, rather than necessarily doing all five. If the obstruction doesn't clear after three cycles of back blows and chest thrusts, dial 999 or 112 to ask for an ambulance, and continue until help arrives. The person choking should always be seen by a healthcare professional afterwards to check for any injuries or small pieces of the obstruction that remain. Drowning If someone is in difficulty in water, don't enter the water to help unless it's absolutely essential. Once the person is on land, if they're not breathing, open the airway and give five initial rescue breaths before starting CPR. If you're alone, perform CPR for one minute before calling for emergency help. Find out how to give CPR, including rescue breaths. If the person is unconscious but still breathing, put them into the recovery position with their head lower than their body and call an ambulance immediately. Continue to observe the casualty to ensure they don't stop breathing or that their airway becomes obstructed. Electric shock (domestic) If someone has had an electric shock, switch off the electrical current at the mains to break the contact between the person and the electrical supply. If you can't reach the mains supply: don't go near or touch the person until you're sure the electrical supply has been switched off   once the power supply has been switched off, and if the person isn't breathing, dial 999 or 112 to for an ambulance Afterwards, seek medical help - unless the electric shock is very minor. Fractures It can be difficult to tell if a person has a broken bone or a joint, as opposed to a simple muscular injury. If you're in any doubt, treat the injury as a broken bone. If the person is unconscious, has difficulty breathing or is bleeding severely, these must be dealt with first, by controlling the bleeding with direct pressure and performing CPR. If the person is conscious, prevent any further pain or damage by keeping the fracture as still as possible until you get them safely to hospital. Assess the injury and decide whether the best way to get them to hospital is by ambulance or car. For example, if the pain isn\u2019t too severe, you could transport them to hospital by car. It's always best to get someone else to drive, so that you can deal with the casualty if they deteriorate \u2013 for example, if they lose consciousness as a result of the pain or start to vomit. However, if: they\u2019re in a lot of pain and in need of strong painkilling medication, don't move them and call an ambulance it's obvious they have a broken leg, don't move them, but keep them in the position you found them in and call an ambulance you suspect they have injured or broken their back, don't move them and call an ambulance Don't give the casualty anything to eat or drink, because they may need an anaesthetic (numbing medication) when they reach hospital. You can read more about specific broken bones in the following pages:  broken ankle broken arm or wrist broken collarbone broken nose broken toe fractured ribs hip fracture Heart attack A heart attack is one of the most common life-threatening heart conditions in the UK. If you think a person is having, or has had, a heart attack, sit them down and make them as comfortable as possible, and call 999 or 112 for an ambulance. Symptoms of a heart attack include: chest pain \u2013 the pain is usually located in the centre or left side of the chest and can feel like a sensation of pressure, tightness or squeezing pain in other parts of the body \u2013 it can feel as if the pain is travelling from the chest down one or both arms, or into the jaw, neck, back or abdomen (tummy)  Sit the person down and make them comfortable. If they're conscious, reassure them and ask them to take a 300mg aspirin tablet to chew slowly (unless you know they shouldn't take aspirin \u2013 for example, if they're under 16 or allergic to it). If the person has any medication for angina, such as a spray or tablets, help them to take it. Monitor their vital signs, such as breathing, until help arrives. If the person deteriorates and becomes unconscious, open their airway, check their breathing and, if necessary, start CPR. Re-alert the emergency services that the casualty is now in cardiac arrest. Poisoning Poisoning is potentially life-threatening. Most cases of poisoning in the UK happen when a person has swallowed a toxic substance, such as bleach, taken an overdose of a prescription medication, or eaten wild plants and fungi. Alcohol poisoning can cause similar symptoms. If you think someone has swallowed a poisonous substance, call 999 or 112 to get immediate medical help and advice. The effects of poisoning depend on the substance swallowed, but can include vomiting, loss of consciousness, pain or a burning sensation. The following advice is important: Find out what's been swallowed, so you can tell the paramedic or doctor. Do not give the person anything to eat or drink unless a healthcare professional advises you to. Do not try to cause vomiting. Stay with the person, because their condition may get worse and they could become unconscious. If the person becomes unconscious while you're waiting for help to arrive, check for breathing and, if necessary, perform CPR. Don't perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation if the casualty's mouth or airway is contaminated with the poison. Don't leave them if they're unconscious because they may roll onto their back, which could cause them to vomit. The vomit could then enter their lungs and make them choke. If the casualty is conscious and breathing normally, put them into the recovery position and continue to monitor their conscious state and breathing. Read more about treating someone who's been poisoned and treating alcohol poisoning. Shock In the case of a serious injury or illness, it's important to look out for signs of shock (see below). Shock is a life-threatening condition that occurs when the circulatory system fails to provide enough oxygenated blood to the body and, as a result, deprives the vital organs of oxygen. This is usually due to severe blood loss, but it can also occur after severe burns, severe vomiting, a heart attack, bacterial infection or a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). The type of shock described here isn't the same as the emotional response of feeling shocked, which can also occur after an accident. Signs of shock include: pale, cold, clammy skin sweating rapid, shallow breathing weakness and dizziness feeling sick and possibly vomiting thirst yawning sighing Seek medical help immediately if you notice that someone has any of the above signs of shock. If they do, you should: dial 999 or 112 as soon as possible and ask for an ambulance treat any obvious injuries lie the person down if their injuries allow you to and, if possible, raise and support their legs use a coat or blanket to keep them warm don't give them anything to eat or drink give them lots of comfort and reassurance monitor the person \u2013 if they stop breathing, start CPR and re-alert the emergency services Stroke The FAST guide is the most important thing to remember when dealing with people who have had a stroke. The earlier they receive treatment, the better. Call for emergency medical help straight away. If you think a person has had a stroke, use the FAST guide: Facial weakness \u2013 is the person unable to smile evenly, or are their eyes or mouth droopy? Arm weakness \u2013 is the person only able to raise one arm? Speech problems \u2013 is the person unable to speak clearly or understand you? Time to call 999 or 112 \u2013 for emergency help if a person has any of these symptoms Read more about the symptoms of a stroke. Getting help in an emergency In the UK, 999 has been the emergency services number for many years. However, you can now also call 112 to get help, which is the single emergency telephone number for the EU. This number will give you access to the emergency services wherever you are in the EU. When you call 999 or 112, you'll be asked what service you need, as well as: your telephone number the address you're calling from  a brief description of what's wrong with the casualty and whether they're bleeding, unconscious or not breathing The call handler may advise you on how to assist the casualty until help arrives. Page last reviewed: 08\/01\/2016 Next review due: 08\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 317 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 115  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 148  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful How to put someone into the recovery position Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This video provides a step-by-step guide on how to put someone into the recovery position. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2016 Next review due: 21\/04\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links When to dial 999 Baby and toddler safety Black eye Find services: A&E Find services: Minor injuries units External links St John Ambulance: courses British Red Cross: courses RoSPA: accident prevention St. Andrews First Aid Resuscitation Council (UK) Child Accident Prevention Trust Minor injuries units If your injury is not serious, get help from a minor injuries unit (MIU) rather than going to A&E About A&E departments Find out when it is appropriate to go to A&E and what other services offer urgent care NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Crabs","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pubic-lice","content":"Pubic lice - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pubic lice  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pubic lice Introduction  Pubic lice (Phthirus pubis) are tiny parasitic insects that live on coarse human body hair, such as pubic hair. As well as being found in pubic hair, the lice are also sometimes found in: underarm and leg hair hair on the chest, abdomen and back facial hair, such as beards and moustaches eyelashes and eyebrows (very occasionally) Unlike head lice, pubic lice don't live in scalp hair. Pubic lice are spread through close bodily contact, most commonly sexual contact. Symptoms of pubic lice After getting pubic lice, it can take several weeks before any symptoms appear. Symptoms are the same for men and women and include: itching in the affected areas inflammation and irritation caused by scratching black powder in your underwear blue spots or small spots of blood on your skin, such as on your thighs or lower abdomen (caused by lice bites) Itching is the most common symptom of pubic lice and is an allergic reaction to their saliva. The itching is usually worse at night, when the lice are most active. What do pubic lice look like? Adult pubic lice are very small (2mm long) and aren't easy to see. They're a yellow-grey or dusky red colour and have six legs. Pubic lice are sometimes known as crabs because they have two large front legs that look like the claws of a crab. These are used to hold onto the base of hairs. The lice lay their eggs (nits) in sacs that are stuck firmly to hairs and are a pale brownish colour. When the eggs hatch, the empty egg sacs are white. Although pubic lice and lice eggs are small and difficult to see, they may be visible in coarse hair anywhere on your body (apart from hair on your head). When to seek medical advice See your GP or practice nurse if you think you have pubic lice. Alternatively, you could go to a sexual health clinic, also known as a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic. These are often located in hospitals or health centres. Search for sexual health services in your area. Pubic lice are usually easy to diagnose by examining the affected area. The doctor or nurse may use a magnifying glass to look for signs of the lice, such as pale-coloured eggs or the lice themselves. Getting tested for STIs You should be tested for other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) if you have pubic lice through sexual contact. The lice don't transmit HIV or other STIs, but a check-up is usually recommended as a precaution.  Any sexual partners you've had over the last three months will also need to be seen and treated. If you prefer, staff at the clinic can contact a person on your behalf without releasing your details. How do you get pubic lice? Pubic lice aren't related to poor personal hygiene. They're usually spread through close bodily contact with an infected person. The lice crawl from hair to hair, but can't fly or jump. They need human blood to survive, so will only leave the body to move from one person to another. The most common way pubic lice are spread is through sexual contact, including vaginal, anal and oral sex. Using condoms and other methods of barrier contraception doesn't protect you against pubic lice. Other types of close bodily contact, such as hugging and kissing, can also spread the lice. It's also possible \u2013 though much rarer \u2013 for pubic lice to be spread through sharing clothes, towels and bedding.  Treating pubic lice Pubic lice can be treated at home with insecticide cream, lotion or shampoo. Your GP or pharmacist can advise you about which treatment to use and how to use it. It's important to follow this advice. Some treatments only need to be applied to the affected area, but sometimes the whole body must be treated, taking care to avoid the eyes. The treatment usually needs to be repeated after three to seven days. If the treatment doesn't work, you may need to use another type. This is because pubic lice can develop resistance to some treatments. Your GP or pharmacist will be able to advise you about suitable alternatives. To prevent re-infestation, anyone you've had close bodily contact with, including any sexual partners you've had in the past three months, should also be treated, even if they don't have symptoms. Certain groups, such as young people under 18 years of age and pregnant or breastfeeding women, may require a specific type of treatment. Ask your GP or pharmacist for further advice about this. Applying a lotion, cream or shampoo In most cases the instructions for using a lotion, cream or shampoo will be as follows: apply the product to the affected area, particularly any hairy areas, such as your eyebrows, beard or moustache \u2013 depending on the product, you might need to apply it to your whole body, including the scalp, neck, ears and face be careful not to get the product in your eyes \u2013 if you do, rinse your eyes thoroughly with water reapply the treatment if you wash any part of your body during the treatment time after the treatment time (stated on the packet) has passed, wash the lotion or cream off repeat the treatment after three to seven days as instructed Don't use the medication more than twice. If you think it hasn't worked go to see your GP or pharmacist for advice. Side effects Insecticides used to treat pubic lice may cause skin irritation, such as itchiness, redness, stinging or burning. If you have skin irritation, wash the insecticide off the affected area. Some aqueous and alcohol-based medications may discolour permed, coloured or bleached hair. Check the patient information leaflet. Follow-up treatment The first treatment application will probably kill the lice, but the eggs may not have been destroyed. This means more lice could hatch and the cycle will start again. Reapplying the treatment after three or seven days will ensure that any lice are killed before they're old enough to lay more eggs. Check for lice a week after your second treatment, or return to your GP, practice nurse, or sexual health clinic so they can check for you. Finding empty eggshells (dead nits) doesn't necessarily mean you're still infested as they can remain stuck to the hairs even after treatment. Treating an eyelash infestation Eyelash infestations are rare. If your eyelashes are infested, seek specialist advice from your doctor. They'll be able to recommend the correct treatment for you.  You can't use the same insecticide lotion or cream that's used on your body because it will irritate your eyes. Make sure you follow the treatment instructions carefully. Washing clothing, towels and bedding Wash clothing, towels and bedding in a washing machine. This should be on a hot cycle (50C or higher) to ensure the lice are killed and to prevent reinfection. Complications of pubic lice Sometimes, a pubic lice infestation can lead to minor complications, such as skin or eye problems. Scratching can irritate your skin, or it could lead to an infection such as impetigo (a bacterial skin infection) or furunculosis (boils on the skin). Eye infections, such as conjunctivitis, and eye inflammation, such as blepharitis, can sometimes develop if your eyelashes have been infested with pubic lice. Seek medical advice if you have severe skin irritation or sore eyes. Sexual health advice You can call the Department of Health's sexual health helpline on 0300 123 7123 for confidential advice and support 24 hours a day, seven days a week. If you're under 25, you can also contact an advisor at Brook using their text and webchat service. They provide free and confidential information and advice about STIs, contraception, pregnancy, plus other sexual health matters. Page last reviewed: 15\/01\/2016 Next review due: 15\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 171 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Head lice Sexual health self-assessment STIs External links BASHH: public and patient information Brook: our services FPA: help and advice Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens What happens at an STI clinic What to expect at an STI clinic, including tests, treatment, and the questions you may be asked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cradle cap","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cradle-cap","content":"Cradle cap - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cradle cap  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cradle-cap Clinical trials Cradle cap Introduction  Cradle cap is the greasy, yellow scaly patches that sometimes appear on the scalps of young babies. It's a common harmless condition that doesn't usually itch or cause discomfort to the baby. If your baby is scratching their head or there is swelling, speak to your GP as it may be a sign of another condition, such as atopic eczema. The medical name for cradle cap is seborrhoeic dermatitis. It usually occurs on the scalp, but can also appear on the face, ears, neck, nappy area or in skin folds, such as at the back of the knees and armpits. Cradle cap usually appears in babies in the first two months and tends to clear up by itself after a few weeks or months. In most cases, it will clear by the time your baby is one year old. What does cradle cap look like? Cradle cap is easy to recognise by the large, greasy, yellow or brown scales on your baby's scalp. The scales will start to flake and may make the affected skin look red. Sometimes the hair will come away with the flakes, but it will grow back. What causes cradle cap? It's not clear what causes cradle cap, although it may be linked to overactive sebaceous glands. These are glands in the skin that produce an oily substance called sebum. Some babies are thought to retain some of their mother's hormones in their bodies for several weeks or months after their birth. These hormones may make the baby's glands produce more sebum. Cradle cap isn't contagious and it isn't caused by poor hygiene or an allergy. It doesn't mean the baby isn't being looked after properly or has an infection. Babies with cradle cap may be more likely to develop dandruff, which is another type of seborrhoeic dermatitis, when they're older. Does cradle cap need treatment? Most cases of cradle cap will clear up on their own in time. Gently washing your baby's hair and scalp with baby shampoo can help prevent a build-up of scales. Massaging baby oil or natural oil, such as almond or olive oil, into their scalp at night can help loosen the crust. There is usually no need to see your GP if your baby has cradle cap. However, you may want to ask them for advice if your baby's scalp becomes inflamed or if the cradle cap spreads to other parts of their body.  It's important not to pick at the scales as this can cause an infection. Special shampoos You can buy special shampoo for cradle cap from your local pharmacy. Always read the instruction leaflet to check it's safe to use on your child. Avoid getting the shampoo in your baby's eyes. If you're unsure about using it, speak to a pharmacist for advice. Generally, don't use shampoos that contain groundnut oil or peanut oil on children under five years of age. See your GP if your baby's cradle cap is severe, if there is swelling or bleeding, or if there are signs of cradle cap on their face or body. Treating an infection If your baby's cradle cap becomes inflamed or infected, a course of antibiotics or an antifungal cream or shampoo such as ketoconazole may be prescribed by a doctor. A mild steroid cream such as hydrocortisone may also be recommended for an inflamed rash. Cradle cap is a common harmless skin condition that often affects young babies  Community content from HealthUnlocked Baby rashes: a visual guide Find out how to recognise some of the most common baby rashes Page last reviewed: 11\/03\/2015 Next review due: 11\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 342 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 207  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atopic eczema Dandruff Dermatitis Skin rashes in babies Your pregnancy and baby guide External links KidsHealth: pregnancy & baby NCT: parent support Skin rashes in babies Most rashes in babies are harmless and clear on their own. Find out about the common causes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy and baby guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cramps, leg","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/legcrampsunknowncause","content":"Leg cramps - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Leg cramps  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview legcrampsunknowncause Clinical trials Leg cramps legcrampsunknowncause Symptoms legcrampsunknowncause Causes legcrampsunknowncause Treatment Introduction  Leg cramps are a common and usually harmless condition where the muscles in your leg suddenly become tight and painful. It usually occurs in the calf muscles, although it can affect any part of your leg, including your feet and thighs. After the cramping has passed, you may have pain and tenderness in your leg for several hours. Three out of four cases occur at night during sleep. Read more about the symptoms of leg cramps. What causes leg cramps? Leg cramps can occur for no apparent reason, known as idiopathic leg cramps, or as a symptom or complication of a health condition, known as secondary leg cramps. Causes of secondary leg cramps can include: pregnancy exercise  certain types of medication, such as statins (medicines that help lower cholesterol levels) liver disease During a cramp, your muscles suddenly contract (shorten), causing pain in your leg. This is known as a spasm, and you cannot control the affected muscle. The cramp can last from a few seconds to 10 minutes. When the spasm passes, you will be able to control the affected muscle again. Read more about the causes of leg cramps. When to see your GP Speak to your GP if your leg cramps are affecting your quality of life; for example, if you have frequent leg cramps or they are interfering with your sleep. Your GP will ask about your symptoms and examine your legs and feet. They may also ask if you have other symptoms, such as numbness or swelling, which may be a sign that you have secondary leg cramps caused by an underlying condition. In this case, you may need further tests, such as blood tests and urine tests, to rule out other conditions.   Treating leg cramps Most cases of leg cramps can be relieved by exercising the affected muscles. Exercising your legs during the day will often help reduce how often you get cramping episodes. Stretches To stretch your calf muscles, stand with the front half of your feet on a step, with your heels hanging off the edge. Slowly lower your heels so that they are below the level of the step. Hold for a few seconds before lifting your heels back up to the starting position. Repeat a number of times. Medication is usually only needed in the most persistent cases where cramping does not respond to exercise. If you have secondary leg cramps, treating the underlying cause may help relieve your symptoms. Leg cramps that occur during pregnancy should pass after the baby is born. Treating cramps that occur as a result of serious liver disease can be more difficult. Your treatment plan may include using medications such as muscle relaxants. Read more about treating leg cramps Preventing leg cramps If you often get leg cramps, regularly stretching the muscles in your lower legs may help prevent the cramps or reduce their frequency. You might find it useful to stretch your calves before you go to bed each night (see stretching advice above or try this post-exercise calf stretch). The following night-time advice may also help: If you lie on your back, make sure that your toes point upwards \u2013 placing a pillow on its side at the end of your bed, with the soles of your feet propped up against it may help keep your feet in the right position.  If you lie on your front, hang your feet over the end of the bed \u2013 this will keep your feet in a relaxed position and help stop the muscles in your calves from contracting and tensing. Keep your sheets and blankets loose. If you have leg cramps, the muscles in your leg will suddenly become tight and painful  Who is affected by leg cramps? It is difficult to estimate exactly how common leg cramps are because most people do not report their symptoms to their GP. Two groups of people particularly affected by leg cramps are: adults over 60 \u2013 it is thought that a third of people over 60 experience leg cramps; about 40% of these have three or more cramps a week pregnant women \u2013 about a third of pregnant women have leg cramps, usually during the last trimester of pregnancy (week 27 to the birth) However, people of all ages, including children, have reported having leg cramps. Both men and women are equally affected. Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Page last reviewed: 11\/09\/2014 Next review due: 11\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2375 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 916  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 719  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 251  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 147  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 342  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Common health problems in pregnancy Easy exercises Men's health 60-plus Sports injuries Women's health 60-plus External links MHRA: recommendations for quinine use How to stretch after a run Stretching exercises to do after a run to gradually cool down and improve your flexibility Men's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information for men aged 60 and over Women's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information and advice for women aged 60 and over NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Craniosynostosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Craniosynostosis","content":"Craniosynostosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Craniosynostosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Craniosynostosis Clinical trials Craniosynostosis Craniosynostosis Symptoms Craniosynostosis Treatment Introduction  Craniosynostosis is a rare skull problem that causes a baby to be born with, or develop, an abnormally shaped head. The irregular skull shape in craniosynostosis can cause persistent headaches, learning difficulties, eye problems and other symptoms. Most symptoms develop in later childhood. The symptoms of craniosynostosis usually result from increased pressure within the skull, which is called intracranial pressure (ICP). Different types of craniosynostosis can be described based on the areas of the skull affected and the resulting changes in shape. Read more about the symptoms and signs of craniosynostosis. How is craniosynostosis diagnosed? Craniosynostosis can usually be diagnosed by a paediatrician (specialist in treating children) after a visual examination of your baby's head. Any severe distortions of the skull or face will be apparent, and the existence of ridges over fused sutures or misalignment of the ears also provide evidence of craniosynostosis. An X-ray or CT scan of the skull may be taken to confirm a diagnosis. CT scans are usually only required to plan some types of surgery or if the diagnosis is in doubt. If your child has other birth defects that suggest craniosynostosis may be part of a wider syndrome, a sample of their blood, hair or saliva may be taken and tested for any genetic mutations. What causes craniosynostosis? Craniosynostosis is the result of the premature fusion of different sections of the skull. This means the skull is unable to grow in affected areas. When one area of the skull is prevented from growing, other areas may \"overgrow\" to compensate and limit the pressure developing around the brain. A lack of growth in some areas and compensatory growth in other areas will result in an altered head shape. Craniosynostosis is usually classfied as either: nonsyndromic \u2013 there are no other birth defects and the cause is unknown syndromic \u2013 craniosynostosis is the result of one of several rare syndromes A syndrome is a range of symptoms related to a common cause, which is usually \u2013 but not always \u2013 genetic. How common is craniosynostosis? Craniosynostosis is rare, affecting an estimated 1 in every 1,800 to 3,000 children. Three out of every four cases affect boys. Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis is the most common form of the condition, accounting for 80-95% of all cases. There are more than 150 different syndromes that can cause syndromic craniosynostosis, all of which are very rare. These include: Apert syndrome \u2013 which affects 1 in every 100,000 children and disrupts the normal growth of bone before birth, resulting in deformities of the head, hands, feet and face Crouzon syndrome \u2013 which affects 1 in every 60,000 children and disrupts the normal growth of bone in both the skull and the face, often resulting in severe facial disfigurement Pfeiffer syndrome \u2013 which affects 1 in every 100,000 children and disrupts bone growth, resulting in deformities of the head and face; it also causes big toes, wide thumbs, and webbed hands and feet Saethre-Chotzen \u2013 a genetic condition that affects around in 1 every 50,000 births and can cause a wide range of disfigurements, including facial defects Treating craniosynostosis The main treatment for craniosynostosis is surgery. This can either be carried out during the first year of your baby's life, or delayed until later childhood. The timing of the surgery is decided by doctors, in consultation with you. Most children with craniosynostosis recover well after surgery and the appearance of their skull improves significantly. However, around 1 in 15 children may have further problems with their skull's development as they get older, which will require further surgery to correct. Read more about treating craniosynostosis. Information about your child If your child has craniosynostosis, your clinical team may pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Craniosynostosis is a rare type of birth defect that affects the shape of a baby's skull  The human skull Many people think of the human skull as a single section of bone similar to the shell of an egg. However, the skull is more like a football \u2013 it consists of a number of plates of bone that fit together to create a sphere. In between the plates of bone are strong elastic tissues called sutures. The sutures give the bone plates flexibility so the skull is able to grow along with the brain. This is important because the human brain grows rapidly following birth, literally doubling in size during the first three years of life, and the skull must grow to accommodate this growth. After the skull and brain have grown to their full adult size, the sutures fuse together to create a single structure of bone. However, in cases of craniosynostosis, one or more sutures fuse together before birth or shortly afterwards. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/11\/2014 Next review due: 03\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 71 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antenatal care Babies with flattened heads If your child goes to hospital Pregnancy and baby guide External links Changing Faces: your child Headlines: the craniofacial support group Flat head syndrome Babies sometimes develop a flattened head as a result of sleeping on their back. It isn't usually a cause for concern because it often corrects itself over time Antenatal checks and tests Find out about the checks, tests and screening you'll be offered in pregnancy, including blood and urine tests Find and choose services for Craniosynostosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease","content":"Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Clinical trials Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Symptoms Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Causes Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Diagnosis Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Treatment Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Prevention Introduction  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a rare and fatal condition that affects the brain. It causes brain damage that worsens rapidly over time. Symptoms of CJD include: loss of intellect and memory change in personality loss of balance and co-ordination slurred speech vision problems and blindness abnormal jerking movements progressive loss of brain function and mobility Most people with CJD will die within a year of the symptoms starting, usually from infection. This is because the immobility caused by CJD can make people with the condition vulnerable to infection. Read more about the symptoms of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and diagnosing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. What causes CJD? CJD appears to be caused by an abnormal infectious protein called a prion. These prions accumulate at high levels in the brain and cause irreversible damage to nerve cells, resulting in the symptoms described above. While the abnormal prions are technically infectious, they're very different to viruses and bacteria. For example, prions aren't destroyed by the extremes of heat and radiation used to kill bacteria and viruses, and antibiotics or antiviral medicines have no effect on them. Read more about the causes of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Types of CJD There are four main types of CJD, which are described below. Sporadic CJD Sporadic CJD is the most common type. The precise cause of sporadic CJD is unclear, but it's been suggested that a normal brain protein changes abnormally ('misfolds') and turns into a prion. Most cases of sporadic CJD occur in adults aged between 45 and 75. On average, symptoms develop at age 60-65 years. Despite being the most common type of CJD, sporadic CJD is still very rare, affecting only one or two people in every million each year in the UK. In the UK during 2014, there were 90 recorded deaths from sporadic CJD. Variant CJD Variant CJD is likely to be caused by consuming meat from a cow that had bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or 'mad cow disease'), a similar prion disease to CJD. Since the link between variant CJD and BSE was discovered in 1996, strict controls have proved very effective in preventing meat from infected cattle from entering the food chain (see preventing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease for more information). However, the average time it takes for the symptoms of variant CJD to occur after initial infection (the incubation period) is still unclear. The incubation period could be very long (over 10 years) in some people, so those exposed to infected meat before the food controls were introduced can still develop variant CJD. The prion that causes variant CJD can also be transmitted by blood transfusion, although this has only happened four times in the UK. There have been 177 recorded cases of variant CJD in the UK to date and there were no recorded deaths from the condition in the UK during 2014. Familial or inherited CJD Familial CJD is a very rare genetic condition where one of the genes a person inherits from their parent (the prion protein gene) carries a mutation that causes prions to form in their brain during adulthood, triggering the symptoms of CJD. It affects about 1 in every 9 million people in the UK. The symptoms of familial CJD usually first develop in the early 50s. In the UK during 2014, there were 10 deaths from familial CJD and similar inherited prion diseases. Iatrogenic CJD Iatrogenic CJD is where the infection is accidentally spread from someone with CJD through medical or surgical treatment. For example, a common cause of iatrogenic CJD in the past was growth hormone treatment using human pituitary growth hormones extracted from deceased individuals, some of whom were infected with CJD. Synthetic versions of human growth hormone have been used since 1985, so this is no longer a risk. Iatrogenic CJD can also occur if instruments used during brain surgery on a person with CJD aren't properly cleaned between each surgical procedure and are re-used on another person. However, increased awareness of these risks means iatrogenic CJD is now very rare. In the UK during 2014, there were just three deaths from iatrogenic CJD (caused by receiving human growth hormone before 1985). How CJD is treated There's currently no cure for CJD, so treatment aims to relieve symptoms and make the affected person feel as comfortable as possible. This can include using medication such as antidepressants to help with anxiety and depression, and painkillers to relieve pain. Some people will need nursing care and assistance with feeding. Read more about treating Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Information about you If you have CJD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Variant CJD compensation scheme In October 2001, the government announced a compensation scheme for UK victims of variant CJD. A trust fund was set up in April 2001 and payments of £25,000 were made available to most affected families. Page last reviewed: 21\/07\/2015 Next review due: 21\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 167 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and Support End of life care Living with a long-term condition External links National Prion Clinic National CJD Surveillance Unit CJD Support Network CJD Foundation Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Crohn's disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Crohns-disease","content":"Crohn's disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Crohn's disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Crohns-disease Real stories Crohns-disease Clinical trials Crohn's disease Crohns-disease Symptoms Crohns-disease Causes Crohns-disease Diagnosis Crohns-disease Treatment Crohns-disease Complications Introduction  Crohn's disease is a long-term condition that causes inflammation of the lining of the digestive system. Inflammation can affect any part of the digestive system, from the mouth to the back passage, but most commonly occurs in the last section of the small intestine (ileum) or the large intestine (colon). Common symptoms can include: diarrhoea abdominal pain fatigue (extreme tiredness) unintended weight loss blood and mucus in your faeces (stools) People with Crohn's disease sometimes go for long periods without symptoms or with very mild symptoms. This is known as remission. Remission can be followed by periods where symptoms flare up and become particularly troublesome. Read more about the symptoms of Crohn's disease and diagnosing Crohn's disease. Why it happens The exact cause of Crohn's disease is unknown. However, research suggests a combination of factors may be responsible. These include: genetics \u2013 genes you inherit from your parents may increase your risk of developing Crohn's disease the immune system \u2013 the inflammation may be caused by a problem with the immune system (the body's defence against infection and illness) that causes it to attack healthy bacteria in the gut previous infection \u2013 a previous infection may trigger an abnormal response from the immune system smoking \u2013 smokers with Crohn's disease usually have more severe symptoms than non-smokers environmental factors \u2013 Crohn's disease is most common in westernised countries such as the UK, and least common in poorer parts of the world such as Africa, which suggests the environment has a part to play; this is known as the hygiene hypothesis  Read more about the possible causes of Crohn's disease. Treating Crohn's disease There's currently no cure for Crohn's disease, so the aim of treatment is to stop the inflammatory process, relieve symptoms (induce and maintain remission) and avoid surgery wherever possible. The first treatment offered to reduce symptoms is usually steroid medication (corticosteroids). If this doesn't help, medication to suppress the immune system (immunosuppressants) and medication to reduce inflammation may be used. In some cases, surgery may be needed to remove the inflamed section of intestine. Once your symptoms are under control (in remission), further medication may be needed to help maintain this. Who is affected? Crohn's disease is a relatively uncommon condition. There are currently at least 115,000 people living with the condition in the UK. Crohn's disease can affect people of all ages, including children. However, most cases first develop between the ages of 16 and 30.  A large number of cases also develop between the ages of 60 and 80. It affects slightly more women than men, but in children more boys are affected than girls. The condition is more common in white people than in black or Asian people. It's most prevalent among Jewish people of European descent. Read more about treating Crohn's disease. Complications Over time, inflammation can damage sections of the digestive system, resulting in complications such as narrowing of the intestine (stricture), or a channel developing between the end of the bowel and the skin near the anus or vagina (fistula). These problems usually require surgical treatment. Read more about the possible complications of Crohn's disease. Information about you If you have Crohn's disease, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. IBD or IBS? Conditions that cause inflammation of the intestines, such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, are known as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). This shouldn't be confused with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), which is a different condition and requires different treatment. However, some people with IBD can also have IBS. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/04\/2015 Next review due: 17\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 876 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 429  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 231  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 115  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Crohn's disease Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Crohn\u2019s disease is a chronic (long-term) condition that causes inflammation of the lining of the digestive system. In this video, an expert discusses the symptoms and treatment options for the condition. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Colostomy Diarrhoea Fistula Ileostomy Malnutrition Ulcerative colitis External links CICRA: children with Crohn's and colitis Crohn's and Colitis UK CORE charity NICE: Crohn's disease IBD Standards Option Grid: treatment decision aid (PDF, 52KB) Digestive health Find out how to beat common digestive problems like bloating and indigestion 'My life with Crohn's disease' Fame Academy voice coach Carrie Grant talks about living with Crohn's disease since she was 18 Find and choose services for Crohn's disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Croup","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Croup","content":"Croup - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Croup  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Croup Clinical trials Croup Croup Symptoms Croup Causes Croup Diagnosis Croup Treatment Croup Complications Introduction  Croup is a childhood condition that affects the windpipe (trachea), the airways to the lungs (the bronchi) and the voice box (larynx). Children with croup have a distinctive barking cough and will make a harsh sound, known as stridor, when they breathe in. They may also have a hoarse voice and find it difficult to breathe because their airway is blocked. Croup can usually be diagnosed by a GP and treated at home. However, if your child\u2019s symptoms are severe and they are finding it difficult to breathe, take them to the nearest hospital\u2019s accident and emergency (A&E) department. Read more about the symptoms of croup and diagnosing croup. Why does croup happen? Commonly, croup is caused by a virus. Several viruses can cause croup but in most cases it is the parainfluenza virus. Read more about the causes of croup. Who is affected by croup? Croup usually affects young children aged between six months and three years, with most cases occurring in one-year-olds.  However, croup can sometimes develop in babies as young as three months, and older children up to 15 years of age. Adults can also get croup but this is rare. The condition is more common during the late autumn and early winter months.  It tends to affect more boys than girls. A child may experience croup more than once during childhood. Treating croup Most cases of croup are mild and can be treated at home. Sitting your child upright and comforting them if they are distressed is important, because crying may make symptoms worse. Your child should also drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration. A single dose of an oral corticosteroid medication called dexamethasone or prednisolone will usually also be prescribed to help reduce the swelling in the throat. If your child has breathing problems they may need hospital treatment, such as adrenaline and oxygen through a mask. Read more about treating croup. Complications Most cases of croup clear up within 48 hours. However, in some cases symptoms can last for up to two weeks. It is extremely rare for a child to die from croup. There are a number of conditions that can follow croup, such as pneumonia and middle ear infection. Read more about the complications of croup. Preventing croup Croup is spread in a similar way to the common cold, so it is difficult to prevent. Good hygiene is the main defence against croup, such as regularly washing hands and cleaning surfaces. A number of your child's routine vaccinations also protect against some of the infections that can cause croup. These include: MMR \u2013 protection from measles, mumps and rubella DTaP\/IPV\/Hib \u2013 protection from diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, polio and Haemophilus influenzae type b Croup is a distinctive bark-like cough with a harsh sound known as stridor when breathing in   Community content from HealthUnlocked Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Page last reviewed: 28\/08\/2014 Next review due: 28\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 973 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 572  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 256  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 65  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Febrile seizures Seasonal flu Coughs, cold and ear infections How to spot a seriously ill baby Epiglottitis Cough Asthma Laryngitis External links Family Lives NCT: National Childbirth Trust Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor Infectious illnesses in children Symptoms to look out for if you're concerned your child may have an infectious childhood illness NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CRPS","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Complex-regional-pain-syndrome","content":"Complex regional pain syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Complex regional pain syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Clinical trials Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Community Complex regional pain syndrome Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Symptoms Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Causes Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Diagnosis Complex-Regional-Pain-Syndrome Treatment   Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a poorly understood condition in which a person experiences persistent severe and debilitating pain. Although most cases of CRPS are triggered by an injury, the resulting pain is much more severe and long-lasting than normal. The pain is usually confined to one limb, but it can sometimes spread to other parts of the body. The skin of the affected body part can become so sensitive that just a slight touch, bump or even a change in temperature can provoke intense pain. Affected areas can also become swollen, stiff or undergo fluctuating changes in colour or temperature. Many cases of CRPS gradually improve to some degree over time, or get completely better. However, some cases of CRPS never go away, and the affected person will experience pain for many years. Read more about the symptoms of CRPS. When to seek medical advice You should see your GP if you have persistent pain that's preventing you from carrying out everyday activities. CRPS can be difficult to diagnose because it involves a number of tests to rule out other possible causes. It's best to seek help as soon as possible, because early treatment may reduce unnecessary suffering. Read more about diagnosing CRPS. Causes of CRPS The cause of CRPS is unknown, but it's generally thought to be the result of the body reacting abnormally to an injury. It used to be thought that CRPS was a psychosomatic condition (the symptoms were \"all in the mind\") but research has disproved this. Read more about the possible causes of CRPS. Who is affected? It's difficult to estimate exactly how common CRPS is, as many cases may go undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. A study claimed that up to 1 in 3,800 people in the UK develop CRPS each year. CRPS can begin at any age, including in children, although the average age for symptoms to start is around 50. Women make up around 3 out of 4 cases. Treating CRPS Treatment for CRPS involves four main aspects: education and self-management \u2013 being given clear information about your condition and advice on any steps you can take to help manage your condition yourself physical rehabilitation \u2013 treatment to help manage your symptoms and reduce the risk of long-term physical problems, such as physiotherapy exercises pain relief \u2013 treatments to help reduce your pain, such as anticonvulsants or antidepressants psychological support \u2013 interventions to help you cope with the emotional impact of living with CRPS, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Due to the complex nature of CRPS, a number of different professionals will usually be involved in your care. Read more about treating CRPS. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 288 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with pain Physiotherapy Occupational therapy NSAIDs External links Action on Pain: chronic pain Arthritis Research UK: CRPS The British Pain Society healthtalk.org: chronic pain Pain Concern Burning Nights: Complex regional pain syndrome Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain How to get NHS help for long-term pain Find out how to get help from your GP or local hospital if you have persistent pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Crushing or opening pills","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/swallowing-pills","content":"Problems swallowing pills Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Problems swallowing pills  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Swallowing pills Introduction  If you or someone you care for struggles to swallow pills, you should discuss it with your doctor or pharmacist. Alternative forms of the medicine are sometimes available, or you may just need to experiment with some simple swallowing techniques. This page gives some basic advice and outlines the clinical and legal issues around crushing tablets or opening capsules. This advice applies to: adults who have difficulty swallowing pills parents of children who struggle to swallow pills nurses or carers of people with dysphagia (swallowing problems) Finding an alternative form If you or the person you care for finds it difficult to swallow tablets or capsules, you can ask your GP or pharmacist if there's an alternative form of the medicine. The Swallowing Difficulties website and the British National Formulary (BNF) may also have details of possible alternatives. Your pills may also be available in one of the following forms: a liquid \u2013 particularly useful for people with dysphagia who rely on a feeding tube a dispersible \u2013 tablet that disintegrates in water a buccal \u2013 tablet that dissolves when held between cheek and gum a patch a suppository \u2013 inserted into the bottom or vagina  a cream an inhaled version Seek the advice of a doctor or pharmacist if you feel unsure about giving medicine \u2013 for example, if you're not sure how to give liquid medicine through a feeding tube. Crushing tablets or opening capsules You can ask your GP or pharmacist if your tablets can be crushed, or your capsules opened and dispersed in water, before taking them. Only certain tablets or capsules can be given this way. The following preparations should never be crushed without seeking professional advice first: CR or CRT (controlled release, or controlled release tablet) LA (long-acting) SR (sustained release) TR (time release) TD (time delay) SA (sustained action) XL (extended release) These medications are designed to be released over a predetermined period of time \u2013 for example, 12-24 hours. Generally, when crushing a tablet or opening a capsule, the dose is released over 5-10 minutes, resulting in an initial overdose (and a higher chance of side effects), followed by a period without medication. Legal issues A nurse or carer of someone with dysphagia shouldn't alter the form of a medicine by crushing or opening it, unless they've been instructed to do so by a doctor. If you crush or open the medicine to give to another person, you're administering it in an unlicensed form. If you haven't consulted a doctor about it, this would render you personally liable for any harm caused, and you would have to justify your actions in the event of an adverse reaction. The Swallowing Difficulties website has more information about the legal consequences of tablet crushing. 10 tips for swallowing pills 1. Moisten your mouth with saliva or water beforehand (a dry mouth makes swallowing harder). 2. Place the pill in the centre of your tongue, and lengthways along your tongue if the pill is oval-shaped. 3. Immediately take a sip of water and wash the pill directly into your throat, throwing your head back.   4. Hold water in your mouth before inserting the pill \u2013 suspending the pill in water may help to flush it down. 5. Try using a straw to drink the water (the suction may help). 6. Taking a deep breath may help suppress your gag reflex.  7. Try chewing some food before placing the pill in your mouth, and swallow the food and pill together. 8. Insert the pill into a small piece of bread or marshmallow. 9. After swallowing the pill, follow it up with food to help it go down. 10. Try putting your chin to your chest when swallowing \u2013 this will open up your windpipe and may be better for you than throwing your head back. NB: These tips are based on common sense, rather than scientific evidence, and may not work for everyone. Alternative forms of medicines are sometimes available if a person has difficulty swallowing pills   Medicines information Find out why some medicines are available from pharmacists or supermarkets, but others only from your GP, plus how medicines are licensed and regulated Page last reviewed: 10\/10\/2014 Next review due: 10\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 88 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Children's medicines Common questions about medicines Dysphagia (swallowing problems) Medicines information External links British National Formulary (BNF) Swallowing difficulties Medicines for babies and children Not all medicines are suitable for young children. Find out what to use to treat your sick child NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Crying baby","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/soothing-crying-baby.aspx","content":"Soothing a crying baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Soothing a crying baby All babies cry, and some cry a lot. Crying is your baby's way of telling you they need comfort and care. Sometimes it's easy to work out what they want, and sometimes it isn't. The most common reasons for crying are: hunger a dirty or wet nappy tiredness wanting a cuddle wind being too hot or too cold boredom overstimulation There may be times of the day when your baby tends to cry a lot and can't be comforted. Early evening is the most common time for this to happen. This can be hard for you, as it's often the time when you're most tired and least able to cope. The amount babies cry tends to peak at about seven weeks, then gradually tail off. How to calm a crying baby Crying during feeds If your baby cries constantly Getting help with a crying baby Never shake your baby How to calm a crying baby Try some of the following ways to comfort your baby. Some may work better than others: If you're breastfeeding, let your baby suckle at your breast. If you're bottle feeding, give your baby a dummy. Sterilise dummies as you would bottles. To avoid tooth decay, don't dip them in anything sweet. Some babies use their thumb instead. Some older babies like to use a bit of cloth or a blanket as a comforter. Hold your baby or put them in a sling so they're close to you. Move about gently, sway and dance, talk to them and sing. Rock your baby backwards and forwards in the pram, or go out for a walk or a drive. Lots of babies like to sleep in cars. Even if they wake up again when you stop, at least you'll have had a break. Find something for them to listen to or look at. This could be music on the radio, a CD, a rattle, or a mobile above the cot. Try stroking your baby's back firmly and rhythmically, holding them against you or lying face downwards on your lap. Undress your baby and massage them gently and firmly. Avoid using any oils or lotions until your baby is at least a month old. Talk soothingly as you do it and keep the room warm enough. Some health centres and clinics run baby massage courses. For information, ask your midwife or health visitor. Try a warm bath. This calms some babies instantly, but makes others cry even more. Sometimes too much rocking and singing can keep your baby awake. You might find lying them down after a feed will help. Ask your health visitor for advice. Crying during feeds Some babies cry and seem unsettled around the time of a feed. If you're breastfeeding, you may find that improving your baby's positioning and attachment helps them settle. You can go to a breastfeeding drop-in and ask for help, or talk to your health visitor. It may be that something you're eating or drinking is affecting your baby. If you think this is happening, try keeping a diary of what you eat and when the crying happens. If you see any patterns, talk to your health visitor. Crying during feeds can sometimes be a symptom of reflux, a common condition where babies bring back milk after feeds. Speak to your health visitor or GP for more information and advice. If your baby cries constantly There are several reasons that can cause a baby to cry excessively. It can be exhausting if you've tried everything and nothing seems to comfort your baby. Colic Excessive crying could be a sign that your baby has colic. Everyone agrees that colic exists, but nobody knows what causes it. Some doctors think it's a kind of stomach cramp. The crying sounds miserable and distressed, and stops for a moment or two, then starts up again, which suggests it could be caused by waves of stomach pain. The crying can go on for some hours. There may be little you can do except try to comfort your baby and wait for the crying to pass. See some tips for coping with colic. Crying and illness If your baby is crying constantly and you can't console or distract them, or the cry doesn't sound like their normal cry, it can be a sign they are ill. Or they may be ill if they are crying and have other symptoms, such as a high temperature. If this is the case, contact your health visitor or GP. Get medical attention as soon as you can if your baby:   has much drier nappies than usual has a high temperature, but their hands and feet feel cold has a fit (seizure or convulsion) has blue, mottled, ashen (grey) or very pale skin breathes rapidly or makes a throaty noise while breathing, or seems to be working hard to breathe, perhaps sucking in their stomach under their ribcage has a spotty purple-red rash anywhere on the body \u2013 this could be a sign of meningitis See more signs of serious illness. If you think there's something wrong, always follow your instincts. During the day, Monday to Friday, contact your GP surgery. At evenings and weekends you can call NHS 111 or your GP's out-of-hours number. Getting help with a crying baby You can talk to a friend, your health visitor or GP, or contact the Cry-sis helpline on 08451 228 669, open 9am to 10pm, 7 days a week. You will be charged for your call.  Cry-sis can put you in touch with other parents who have been in the same situation. You can also visit the Cry-sis website for information on coping with crying babies.   If you decide to talk to your health visitor or GP, it can help to keep a record of how often and when your baby cries. For example, this might be after every feed or during the evening. This can help your health visitor or GP to work out if there is a particular cause for the crying. Keeping a record can also help you identify the times when you need extra support. You could think about possible changes to your routine. There may be times when you're so tired and angry you feel like you can't take any more. This happens to a lot of parents, so don't be ashamed to ask for help. If you don't have anyone who can take care of your baby for a short time and the crying is making you stressed, put your baby in their cot or pram, make sure they're safe, close the door, go into another room and try to calm yourself down. Set a time limit \u2013 for example, 10 minutes \u2013 then go back. Never shake your baby No matter how frustrated you feel, you must never shake your baby. Shaking moves their head violently and can cause brain damage. Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. How do I calm my crying baby? Media last reviewed: 20\/03\/2014 Next review due: 20\/03\/2017 Page last reviewed: 07\/02\/2016 Next review due: 07\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 165 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful NHS Choices links Dealing with colic Helping your baby to sleep How to take your baby's temperature Parenting: coping with stress Other useful links Cry-sis NCT: crying baby  Community content from HealthUnlocked Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy and baby guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cryptorchidism","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/undescendedtesticles","content":"Undescended testicles - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Undescended testicles  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview undescendedtesticles Real stories undescendedtesticles Clinical trials Undescended testicles undescendedtesticles Treatment Introduction  Undescended testicles are a common childhood condition where a boy's testicles are not in their usual place in the scrotum. It's estimated that about one in every 25 boys are born with undescended testicles. In most cases, no treatment is necessary, as the testicles will usually move down into the scrotum naturally during the first three to six months of life. However, around one in 100 boys has testicles that stay undescended unless treated. The medical term for having one or two undescended testicles is unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism. When to see your GP Undescended testicles are usually detected during the newborn physical examination carried out soon after birth, or during a routine check-up at six to eight weeks. See your GP if at any point you notice that one or both of your child's testicles are not in the normal place within the scrotum. Undescended testicles aren't painful and your child isn't at risk of any immediate health problems, but they should be monitored by a doctor in case treatment is needed later on. What causes undescended testicles? During pregnancy, the testicles form inside a baby boy's abdomen (tummy), before slowly moving down into the scrotum about a month or two before birth. It's not known exactly why some boys are born with undescended testicles. Most boys with the condition are otherwise completely healthy. Being born prematurely (before the 37th week of pregnancy), having a low birth weight and having a family history of undescended testicles may increase the chances of a boy being born with undescended testicles. Diagnosing undescended testicles Undescended testicles can usually be diagnosed after a physical examination. This will determine whether the testicles can be felt near the scrotum (palpable) or if they can't be felt at all (impalpable). This physical examination can sometimes be difficult, so your doctor may need to refer your child to a paediatric surgeon. No further scans or tests are needed to locate the testicles if they can be felt by the doctor. If they cannot be felt, part of the initial surgical treatment (see below) may involve keyhole surgery (a diagnostic laparoscopy) to see if the testicles are inside the abdomen. How undescended testicles are treated If the testicles haven't descended by six months, they're very unlikely to do so and treatment will usually be recommended. This is because boys with untreated undescended testicles can have fertility problems in later life and an increased risk of developing testicular cancer. Treatment will usually involve an operation called an orchidopexy to move the testicle(s) into the correct position inside the scrotum. This is a relatively straightforward operation, with a good success rate. Surgery is ideally carried out before 12 months of age. If undescended testicles are treated at an early age, the risk of fertility problems and testicular cancer can be reduced. Read more about treating undescended testicles. Retractile testicles In most boys, the testicles can move in and out of the scrotum at different times, usually changing position as a result of temperature changes or feelings of fear or excitement. This is a separate condition known as retractile testicles. Retractile testicles in young boys aren't a cause for concern, as the affected testicles often settle permanently in the scrotum as they get older. However, they may need to be monitored during childhood, because they sometimes don't descend naturally and treatment may be required. See your GP if you notice that your child's testicles are not within the scrotum. Your GP can carry out an examination to determine whether your child's testicles are undescended or retractile. Page last reviewed: 10\/09\/2015 Next review due: 10\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 111 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Infertility Newborn physical examination Testicular cancer External links Great Ormond Street Hospital: undescended testicles Newborn physical examination All new parents are offered a physical examination for their newborn. Find out what's involved Baby health and development reviews Find out when your baby will have their health and development reviews, and what happens at each one NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CT scan","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/CT-scan","content":"CT scan - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories CT scan  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview CT-scan Clinical trials CT scan Introduction  A computerised tomography (CT) scan uses X-rays and a computer to create detailed images of the inside of the body.  CT scans are sometimes referred to as CAT scans or computed tomography scans. They're carried out in hospital by specially trained operators called radiographers and can be done while you're staying in hospital or during a short visit. When CT scans are used CT scans can produce detailed images of many structures inside the body, including the internal organs, blood vessels and bones. They can be used to: diagnose conditions \u2013 including damage to bones, injuries to internal organs, problems with blood flow, strokes and cancer guide further tests or treatments \u2013 for example, CT scans can help to determine the location, size and shape of a tumour before having radiotherapy, or allow a doctor to take a needle biopsy (where a small tissue sample is removed using a needle) or drain an abscess monitor conditions \u2013 including checking the size of tumours during and after cancer treatment CT scans wouldn't normally be used to check for problems if you don't have any symptoms (known as screening). This is because the benefits of screening may not outweigh the risks, particularly if it leads to unnecessary testing and anxiety.  Preparing for a CT scan Your appointment letter will mention anything you need to do to prepare for your scan. You may be advised to avoid eating anything for several hours before your appointment, to help ensure that clear images are taken. You should contact the hospital after receiving your appointment letter if you have any allergies or kidney problems, or if you're taking medication for diabetes, because special arrangements may need to be made. You should also let the hospital know if you're pregnant. CT scans aren't usually recommended for pregnant women unless it's an emergency, as there's a small chance the X-rays could harm your baby. It's a good idea to wear loose comfortable clothes, as you may be able to wear these during the scan. Try to avoid wearing jewellery and clothes containing metal (such as zips), as these will need to be removed. Before having a CT scan Before having the scan, you may be given a special dye called a contrast to help improve the quality of the images. This may be swallowed in the form of a drink, passed into your bottom (enema), or injected into a blood vessel. Tell the radiographer if you feel anxious or claustrophobic about having the scan. They can give you advice to help you feel calm and can arrange for you to have a sedative (medication to help you relax) if necessary. Before the scan starts, you may be asked to remove your clothing and put on a gown. You'll also be asked to remove anything metal, such as jewellery, as metal interferes with the scanning equipment. What happens during a CT scan During the scan, you'll usually lie on your back on a flat bed that passes into the CT scanner. The scanner consists of a ring that rotates around a small section of your body as you pass through it. Unlike a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, the scanner doesn't surround your whole body at once, so you shouldn't feel claustrophobic. The radiographer will operate the scanner from the next room. While the scan is taking place, you'll be able to hear and speak to them through an intercom. While each scan is taken, you'll need to lie very still and breathe normally. This ensures that the scan images aren't blurred. You may be asked to breathe in, breathe out, or hold your breath at certain points. The scan will usually take around 10-20 minutes.  What happens afterwards You shouldn't experience any after effects from a CT scan and can usually go home soon afterwards. You can eat and drink, go to work and drive as normal. If a contrast was used, you may be advised to wait in the hospital for up to an hour to make sure you don't have a reaction to it (see below). The contrast is normally completely harmless and will pass out of your body in your urine. Your scan results won't usually be available immediately. A computer will need to process the information from your scan, which will then be analysed by a radiologist (a specialist in interpreting images of the body). After analysing the images, the radiologist will write a report and send it to the doctor who referred you for the scan, so they can discuss the results with you. This normally takes a few days or weeks. Are CT scans safe? CT scans are quick, painless and generally safe. However, there's a small risk you could have an allergic reaction to the contrast dye used and you will be exposed to X-ray radiation. The amount of radiation you're exposed to during a CT scan varies, depending on how much of your body is scanned. CT scanners are designed to make sure you're not exposed to unnecessarily high levels. Generally, the amount of radiation you're exposed to during each scan is the equivalent to between a few months and a few years of exposure to natural radiation from the environment. It's thought exposure to radiation during CT scans could slightly increase your chances of developing cancer many years later, although this risk is thought to be very small (less than 1 in 2,000). For more information, read GOV.UK: patient dose information. The benefits and risks of having a CT scan will always be weighed up before it's recommended. Talk to your doctor or radiographer about the potential risks beforehand, if you have any concerns. Page last reviewed: 24\/07\/2015 Next review due: 24\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2161 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 512  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 313  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links MRI scan PET scan Ultrasound scan X-ray External links Brain & Spine Foundation: CT scans Cancer Research UK: CT scan Easy health: CT scanleaflets Yellow Card Scheme X-ray An X-ray is a common procedure used to produce images of the inside of the body MRI scan An MRI scan uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to produce detailed images of the inside of the body NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cushing's syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cushings-syndrome","content":"Cushing's syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cushing's syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cushings-syndrome Clinical trials Cushing's syndrome Cushings-syndrome Symptoms Cushings-syndrome Causes Cushings-syndrome Diagnosis Cushings-syndrome Treatment Introduction  Cushing's syndrome (hypercortisolism) is a collection of symptoms caused by very high levels of a hormone called cortisol in the body. The symptoms of Cushing's syndrome include: weight gain thinning skin that bruises easily reddish-purple stretch marks on the thighs, stomach, buttocks, arms, legs or breasts fat deposits that develop in the face, causing it to become round muscle or bone weakness  decreased interest in sex (loss of libido) What causes Cushing's syndrome? Cushing's syndrome often develops as a side effect of treatment with corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are widely used to reduce inflammation and treat autoimmune conditions (where the immune system malfunctions and attacks healthy tissue). People taking high doses of corticosteroids long-term often have a build-up of cortisol in their blood. This type of Cushing's syndrome is sometimes called iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome. A less common cause of Cushing's syndrome is where a tumour (growth) develops inside one of the body's glands, causing it to produce an excessive amount of hormones. This is known as endogenous Cushing's syndrome. Read more about the causes of Cushing's syndrome. Diagnosing Cushing's syndrome Cushing's syndrome can be difficult to diagnose because the symptoms are similar to those of other more common conditions, such as an underactive thyroid gland and high blood pressure. Your GP will need to know whether you've been taking medication, and you'll probably need to have a urine test, blood test, or saliva test to measure the levels of cortisol in your body. Read more about how Cushing's syndrome is diagnosed. Treating Cushing's syndrome The main treatment for iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome is to decrease or withdraw the use of corticosteroids. However, this must be done gradually to avoid any unpleasant side effects. For endogenous Cushing's syndrome, surgery to remove the tumour is usually recommended. If surgery is unsuccessful or it's not possible to remove the tumour safely, medication can be used to counter the effects of the high cortisol levels. Although treatment is effective, it can take some time to bring the symptoms under control \u2013 any time from a few weeks to a few years in some cases. Left untreated, Cushing's syndrome can cause high blood pressure, which increases the risk of heart attack and stroke. Read more about treating Cushing's syndrome. Who's affected? Cushing's syndrome is very rare, affecting around 1 in 50,000 people. Anyone can get it, although it tends to affect adults aged from 20 to 50 years. Women are three times more likely to develop the syndrome than men. Information about you If you have Cushing's syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 04\/02\/2015 Next review due: 04\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 175 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Benign brain tumour Corticosteroids High blood pressure Living with a long-term condition Radiotherapy External links Cushing's Help and Support Cushing's Support and Research Foundation Corticosteroids Corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medicines prescribed to treat a wide range of health conditions Type 2 diabetes check Take this quick and simple test to find out if you are at risk of type 2 diabetes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cutis laxa","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/ehlers-danlos-syndrome","content":"Ehlers-Danlos syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ehlers-Danlos syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview ehlers-danlos-syndrome Clinical trials ehlers-danlos-syndrome Community Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Introduction  Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is the name for a group of rare inherited conditions that affect connective tissue. Connective tissues provide support in skin, tendons, ligaments, blood vessels, internal organs and bones. There are several different types of EDS that may share some symptoms, including: an increased range of joint movement (joint hypermobility) stretchy skin fragile skin that breaks or bruises easily The different types of EDS are caused by faults in certain genes that make connective tissue weaker. Depending on the type of EDS, the faulty gene may have been inherited from one parent, or both parents. Sometimes the faulty gene isn\u2019t inherited, but occurs in the person for the first time. EDS can affect people in different ways. For some the condition is relatively mild, while for others their symptoms can be disabling. Some of the rare severe types can be life-threatening. This pages covers: Main types of EDS Getting medical advice Living with EDS How EDS is inherited Information about you Links to more information Main types of EDS EDS-hypermobile type is the most common type of EDS. Rarer types include classical EDS, vascular EDS and kyphoscoliotic EDS. EDS-hypermobile type EDS-hypermobile type (EDS-HT), also known as hypermobile EDS or EDS type III, is often thought to be the same as or very similar to another condition called joint hypermobility syndrome. People with EDS-HT may have: joint hypermobility loose, unstable joints that dislocate easily joint pain and clicking joints extreme tiredness (fatigue) skin that bruises easily digestive problems, such as heartburn and constipation dizziness and an increased heart rate after standing up problems with internal organs, such as mitral valve prolapse or organ prolapse problems with bladder control (stress incontinence) Currently, there are no tests to confirm whether someone has EDS-HT. The diagnosis is made based on a person's medical history and a physical examination. Classical EDS Classical EDS (previously EDS types I and II) is less common than hypermobile EDS and tends to affect the skin more. People with classical EDS may have: joint hypermobility loose, unstable joints that dislocate easily stretchy skin fragile skin that can split easily \u2013 especially over the forehead, knees, shins and elbows smooth, velvety skin that bruises easily wounds that are slow to heal and leave wide scars hernias and organ prolapse Vascular EDS Vascular EDS (previously EDS type IV) is a rare type of EDS and is often considered to be the most serious. It affects the blood vessels and internal organs, which can cause them to split open and lead to life-threatening bleeding. People with vascular EDS may have: skin that bruises very easily thin skin with visible small blood vessels, particularly on the upper chest and legs  fragile blood vessels that can bulge or tear, resulting in serious internal bleeding a risk of organ problems, such as the bowel tearing, the womb tearing (in late pregnancy) and partial collapse of the lung hypermobile fingers and toes, unusual facial features, (such as a thin nose and lips, large eyes and small earlobes), varicose veins and delayed wound healing Kyphoscoliotic EDS Kyphoscoliotic EDS (previously EDS type VI) is rare. People with kyphoscoliotic EDS may have: curvature of the spine \u2013 this starts in early childhood and often gets worse in the teenage years joint hypermobility loose, unstable joints that dislocate easily weak muscle tone from childhood (hypotonia) \u2013 this may cause a delay in sitting and walking, or difficulty walking if symptoms get worse fragile eyes that can easily be damaged soft, velvety skin that is stretchy, bruises easily and scars Getting medical advice See your GP if you have several troublesome symptoms of EDS. You don't usually need to worry if you only have a few symptoms and they're not causing any problems. Joint hypermobility, for example, is common in healthy people and is unlikely to be caused by EDS if you don't have any other symptoms. Your GP may refer you to a joint specialist (rheumatologist) if you have problems with your joints and they suspect EDS. If there's a possibility you may have one of the rare types of EDS, your GP can refer you to your local genetics service for an assessment. The local genetics specialist will ask about your medical history, family history, assess your symptoms and may carry out a genetic blood test to confirm the diagnosis. If further investigation is needed, your hospital doctor can refer you to a  specialist EDS diagnostic service based in Sheffield and London. Living with EDS There's no specific treatment for EDS, but with support and advice it's possible to manage many of the symptoms. Adapting your activities It's important to be careful about activities that put a lot of strain on your joints or put you at risk of injury. However, it's important not to be overprotective and avoid living an otherwise normal life. Advice will depend on which type of EDS you have and how it affects you. you may be advised to avoid some activities entirely, such as heavy lifting and contact sports for some activities, you may need to wear appropriate protection and be taught how to reduce the strain on your joints lower-risk activities, such as swimming or pilates, may be recommended to help you stay fit and healthy if fatigue is a problem, you can be taught ways to conserve your energy and pace your activities For more tips and advice on joint care, you can read about living with EDS on the Ehlers-Danlos Support UK website. Specialist support People with EDS may also benefit from support from a number of different healthcare professionals. For example: a physiotherapist can teach you exercises to help strengthen your joints, avoid injuries and manage pain an occupational therapist can help you manage daily activities and give advice on equipment that may help you counselling and cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) may be useful if you're struggling to cope with long-term pain for certain types of EDS, regular scans carried out in hospital can detect problems with internal organs genetic counselling can help you learn more about the cause of your condition, how it's inherited, and what the risks of passing it on to your children are (see below) Your GP or consultant can refer you to these services. How EDS is inherited EDS can be inherited, but in some cases it occurs by chance in someone without a family history of the condition. The two main ways that EDS is inherited are: autosomal dominant inheritance (hypermobile, classical and vascular EDS) \u2013 the faulty gene that causes EDS is passed on by one parent and there's a 50% risk of each of their children developing the condition autosomal recessive inheritance (kyphoscoliotic EDS) \u2013 the faulty gene is inherited from both parents and there's a 25% risk of each of their children developing the condition A person with EDS can only pass on the same type of EDS to their children. For example, the children of someone with hypermobile EDS can't inherit vascular EDS. The severity of the condition can vary within the same family. Information about you If you have EDS, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. More information The following websites provide more information, advice and support for people with EDS and their families: Ehlers-Danlos Support UK \u2013 you can also call their free helpline on 0800 907 8518, find local support groups or visit their online forum Hypermobility Syndromes Association (HMSA) \u2013 you can also call their helpline on 033 3011 6388, find local groups, or visit their online forum Page last reviewed: 15\/03\/2016 Next review due: 15\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 378 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 118  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Joint hypermobility Joint pain Living with pain External links Ehlers-Danlos Support UK Hypermobility Syndromes Association Annabelle's Challenge Physiotherapy Find out how physiotherapy can help promote healing and wellbeing Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cuts and grazes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cuts-and-grazes","content":"Cuts and grazes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cuts and grazes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cuts and grazes Introduction  Most cuts and grazes are minor and can be easily treated at home. Stopping the bleeding, cleaning the wound thoroughly and covering it with a plaster or dressing is usually all that's needed. Minor wounds should start to heal within a few days. This page covers: How to treat cuts and grazes When to get medical help When to go to accident and emergency (A&E) How to treat cuts and grazes Stop the bleeding Stop any bleeding before applying a dressing to the wound. Apply pressure to the area using a clean and dry absorbent material \u2013 such as a bandage, towel or handkerchief \u2013 for several minutes. If the cut is to your hand or arm, raise it above your head to help reduce the flow of blood. If the injury is to a lower limb, lie down and raise the affected area above the level of your heart. Clean the wound and apply a dressing When the wound has stopped bleeding, clean it and cover it with a dressing to help stop it becoming infected. To do this: wash and dry your hands thoroughly clean the wound under drinking-quality running tap water \u2013 avoid using antiseptic as it may damage the skin and slow healing pat the area dry with a clean towel apply a sterile adhesive dressing, such as a plaster \u2013 read more about how to apply plasters and other dressings Keep the dressing clean by changing it as often as necessary. Keep the wound dry by using waterproof dressings, which will allow you to take showers. You can remove the dressing after a few days, once the wound has closed itself. Take painkillers if needed If the wound is painful for the first few days, you can take over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. When to get medical help Call NHS 111 or visit your local walk-in centre, minor injuries unit or GP surgery if there's a risk your wound could become infected, or you think it's already infected. A wound is at risk of infection if: it has been contaminated with dirt, pus or other bodily fluids there was something in the wound before it was cleaned, such as gravel or a shard of glass it has a jagged edge it's longer than 5cm (2 inches) it was caused by an animal or human bite Signs a wound has become infected include: swelling, redness and increasing pain in the affected area pus forming in or around the wound feeling generally unwell a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above swollen glands under the chin or in the neck, armpits or groin An infected wound can usually be successfully treated with a short course of antibiotics. When to go to A&E Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible if: you cannot stop the bleeding you're bleeding from an artery \u2013 blood from an artery comes out in spurts with each beat of the heart, and is bright red and usually hard to control you experience persisting or significant loss of sensation near the wound or you're having trouble moving any body parts you have received a severe cut to the face \u2013 you may require urgent treatment to prevent scarring you have received a cut to the palm of your hand and it looks infected \u2013 these types of infection can spread quickly there's a possibility a foreign body is still inside the wound the wound is very large or the injury has caused a lot of tissue damage In A&E, your wound will be examined to determine whether there's any risk of infection. You may need a booster injection to prevent tetanus, and your wound may be closed with stitches, strips or special glue before a dressing is applied. If your wound is at risk of infection, it won't usually be closed because this may trap any infection inside. Instead, it will be packed with a non-sticky dressing before being covered with a protective dressing until it's safe to close. Page last reviewed: 21\/01\/2016 Next review due: 21\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 396 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 209  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Preventing accidents at home Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Katrina Phillips of the Child Accident Prevention Trust explains how to make your home childproof and prevent avoidable accidents. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Accidents to children in the home Animal and human bites First aid External links British Red Cross: first aid Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA): home safety St John Ambulance: cuts and grazes First aid What to do if someone is injured in an accident If your child has an accident How to deal with accidents and injuries, including cuts and broken bones NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"CVS","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chorionic-Villus-sampling","content":"Chorionic villus sampling - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chorionic villus sampling  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chorionic-Villus-sampling Clinical trials Chorionic villus sampling Chorionic-Villus-sampling Why it's offered Chorionic-Villus-sampling What happens Chorionic-Villus-sampling Results Chorionic-Villus-sampling Risks Introduction  Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) is a test you may be offered during pregnancy to check if your baby has a genetic disorder, such as Down\u2019s syndrome. It involves removing and testing a small sample of cells from the placenta (the organ linking the mother\u2019s blood supply with her unborn baby\u2019s). When CVS is offered CVS isn't routinely offered to all pregnant women. It's only offered if there's a high risk your baby could have a genetic condition. This could be because: an earlier antenatal screening test has suggested there may be a problem, such as Down's syndrome, Edward's syndrome or Patau's syndrome, or sickle cell anaemia you've had a previous pregnancy with these problems you have a family history of a genetic condition, such as cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy, and an abnormality is detected in your baby during a routine ultrasound scan It's important to remember that you don't have to have CVS if it's offered. It's up to you to decide whether you want it. Your midwife or doctor will speak to you about what the test involves, and let you know what the possible benefits and risks are, to help you make a decision. Read more about why CVS is offered and deciding whether to have it. How CVS is performed CVS is usually carried out between the 11th and 14th weeks of pregnancy, although it's sometimes performed later than this if necessary. During the test, a small sample of cells will be removed from the placenta using one of two methods: transabdominal CVS \u2013 a needle is inserted through your tummy (this is the most common method used) transcervical CVS \u2013 a tube or small forceps (smooth metal instruments that look like tongs) are inserted through the cervix (the neck of the womb) The test itself takes about 10 minutes, although the whole consultation may take about 30 minutes. The CVS procedure is usually described as being uncomfortable rather than painful, although you may experience some cramps that are similar to period pains for a day or two afterwards. Read more about what happens during CVS. Getting your results The first results of the test should be available within three working days and this will tell you whether a major chromosome condition, such as Down's, Edward's or Patau's syndrome, has been discovered. If rarer conditions are also being tested for, it can take two to three weeks or more for the results to come back. If your test shows that your baby has a serious inherited or genetic disorder, the implications will be fully discussed with you. There's no cure for most of the conditions CVS finds, so you'll need to consider your options carefully. You may choose to continue with your pregnancy, while gathering information about the condition so you're fully prepared, or you may consider having a termination (abortion). Read more about the results of CVS. What are the risks of CVS? Before you decide to have CVS, the risks and possible complications will be discussed with you. One of the main risks associated with CVS is miscarriage, which is the loss of the pregnancy in the first 23 weeks. This is estimated to occur in 1-2% of women who have CVS. There are also some other risks, such as infection or needing to have the procedure again because it wasn't possible to accurately test the first sample that was removed. The risk of CVS causing complications is higher if it's carried out before the 10th week of pregnancy, which is why the test is only carried out after this point. Read more about the risks of CVS. What are the alternatives? An alternative to CVS is a test called amniocentesis. This is where a small sample of amniotic fluid (the fluid that surrounds the baby in the womb) is removed for testing. It's usually carried out between the 15th and 18th week of pregnancy, although it can be performed later than this if necessary. This test may have a slightly smaller risk of causing a miscarriage, but your pregnancy will be at a more advanced stage before you can get the results, so you'll have a bit less time to consider your options. If you're offered tests to look for a genetic disorder in your baby, a specialist involved in carrying out the test will be able to discuss the different options with you, and help you make a decision. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 06\/08\/2015 Next review due: 06\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 114 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Amniocentesis Antenatal care Genetics Screening tests in pregnancy External links Antenatal Results and Choices NCT: antenatal screening NHS Screening Programme: chorionic villus sampling (PDF, 344kb) Antenatal checks and tests Find out about the checks, tests and screening you'll be offered in pregnancy, including blood and urine tests Screening in pregnancy Screening for abnormalities in pregnancy, including inherited disorders such as sickle cell NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Antenatal care","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/antenatal-midwife-care-pregnant.aspx#close","content":"Your antenatal care - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your antenatal care Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. How often should my unborn baby move? Media last reviewed: 20\/03\/2014 Next review due: 20\/03\/2017 Contacting your midwife or GP When you first learn that you're pregnant, get in touch with a midwife or GP as soon as possible. Ideally this should be by 10 weeks of your pregnancy. Telling your GP and\/or midwife promptly will help to make sure you receive maternity healthcare that takes into account all your health needs and preferences. Find maternity units in your area. You can read all the information on this page, or click on the links below to go straight to the relevant section: What is antenatal care? Starting your antenatal care How many appointments you'll have Your first visit and booking appointment Later visits Checking your baby's development and wellbeing Your maternity notes What is antenatal care? Antenatal care is the care you receive from healthcare professionals during your pregnancy. You'll be offered a series of appointments with a midwife, or sometimes with a doctor who specialises in pregnancy and birth (an obstetrician). They will check that you and your baby are well, give you useful information to help you have a healthy pregnancy (including healthy eating and exercise advice) and answer any questions you may have. You will also be offered antenatal classes, including breastfeeding workshops. You need to book antenatal classes in advance, so ask your midwife about when you should book classes in your area. Starting antenatal care You can book an appointment with your GP or directly with your midwife as soon as you know that you're pregnant. Your GP surgery or a Children\u2019s Centre can put you in touch with your nearest midwifery service.  It's best to see them as early as possible to obtain the information you need to have a healthy pregnancy, and because some tests, such as screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia should be done before you're 10 weeks' pregnant. If you have special health needs, your midwife, GP or obstetrician may take shared responsibility for your maternity care. This means they will all see you during your pregnancy. Let your midwife know if you have a disability that means you have special requirements for your antenatal appointments or for labour. If you don't speak English, let your midwife know and arrangements will be made. Antenatal appointments If you're expecting your first child, you'll have up to 10 antenatal appointments. If you've had a baby before, you'll have around seven antenatal appointments. Under certain circumstances, for example if you develop a medical condition, you may have more. Early in your pregnancy, your midwife or doctor will give you written information about how many appointments you're likely to have and when they'll happen. You should have a chance to discuss the schedule with them. If you can't keep an antenatal appointment, let the clinic or midwife know and make another appointment. Your appointments can take place at your home, in a Children's Centre, in your GP surgery or in hospital. You will usually go to the hospital for your scans. Your antenatal appointments should take place in a setting where you feel able to discuss sensitive issues that may affect you, such as domestic violence, sexual abuse, mental illness or drugs. To give you the best pregnancy care, your midwife will ask you many questions about your health, your family's health and your preferences. Your midwife will do some checks and tests, some of which will be done throughout your pregnancy. The results of these tests may affect your choices later in pregnancy, so it\u2019s important not to miss them. Your midwife will also ask about any other social care support you may have or need, such as support from social workers or family liaison officers. Your first visit Your first visit with your midwife or GP is the appointment when you tell them that you're pregnant. At this first visit, you will be given information about:  folic acid and vitamin D supplements nutrition, diet and food hygiene lifestyle factors that may affect your health or the health of your baby, such as smoking, recreational drug use and drinking alcohol  antenatal screening tests, including screening for sickle cell disease and thalassaemia, infectious diseases and screening for Down's syndrome. You should be offered screening for sickle cell disease and thalassaemia before 10 weeks. This is so you and your partner can find out about all your options and make an informed decision if your baby is at risk of inheriting one of these conditions. They will give you information on keeping healthy, and ask whether you have had any previous health or pregnancy issues, such as complications in pregnancy. It's important to tell your midwife or doctor if: you've had any complications or infections in a previous pregnancy or delivery, such as pre-eclampsia or premature birth  you're being treated for a chronic disease, such as diabetes or high blood pressure  you or anyone in your family have previously had a baby with an abnormality, such as spina bifida  there's a family history of an inherited disease, such as sickle cell or cystic fibrosis you know that you are a genetic carrier for an inherited condition such as sickle cell or thalassaemia. You should also tell the midwife if you know the baby's biological father is a genetic carrier for one of these conditions you have had fertility treatment and either a donor egg or donor sperm An important part of antenatal care is getting information that will help you to make informed choices about your pregnancy. Your midwife or doctor will give you information in writing or some other form that you can easily use and understand. They can provide you with information in an appropriate format if you:  have a physical, learning or sensory disability do not speak English The booking appointment Your next appointment should happen when you are 8-12 weeks pregnant. This is called the booking appointment. It will last for up to two hours, and could take place either at a hospital or in the community, for example in a clinic at a health centre, in a GP surgery or at home. You'll see a midwife and sometimes a doctor. You may also be offered an ultrasound scan. You will be given information about: how the baby develops during pregnancy (see the pregnancy development slideshow) nutrition and diet general exercise and pelvic floor exercises antenatal screening tests your antenatal care and antenatal classes breastfeeding workshops  maternity and paternity benefits  planning your labour and where to have your baby  The midwife or doctor will ask questions to build up a picture of you and your pregnancy. This is to make sure you're given the support you need, and so that any risks are spotted early. You will probably want to ask a lot of questions. It often helps to write down what you want to say in advance, as it\u2019s easy to forget once you're there. It\u2019s important to find out what you want to know and to talk about your own feelings and preferences. Several antenatal screening tests are performed on a sample of your blood which is usually taken at your booking appointment.  Questions you might be asked The midwife or doctor might ask about: the date of the first day of your last period  your health any previous illnesses and operations any previous pregnancies and miscarriages  ethnic origins of you and your partner, to find out whether your baby is at risk of certain inherited conditions, or other relevant factors, such as whether your family has a history of twins your job or your partner's job, and what kind of accommodation you live in to see whether your circumstances might affect your pregnancy how you're feeling and whether you've been feeling depressed Your booking appointment is an opportunity to tell your midwife or doctor if you're in a vulnerable situation or if you need extra support. This could be due to domestic abuse or violence, sexual abuse or female genital mutilation. Later antenatal visits From around 24 weeks, your antenatal appointments will usually become more frequent. However, if your pregnancy is uncomplicated and you are in good health, you may not be seen as often as someone who needs to be more closely monitored. Later visits are usually quite short. Your midwife or doctor will:  check your urine and blood pressure feel your abdomen (tummy) to check the baby's position measure your uterus (womb) to check your baby's growth listen to your baby's heartbeat if you want them to You can also ask questions or talk about anything that's worrying you. Talking about your feelings is as important as all the antenatal tests and examinations. You should be given information about: your birth plan  preparing for labour and birth how to tell if you're in active labour induction of labour if your baby is overdue (after your expected date of delivery)  the \"baby blues\" and postnatal depression feeding your baby vitamin K (which is given to prevent bleeding caused by vitamin K deficiency in your baby) screening tests for newborn babies looking after yourself and your new baby The NICE antenatal care guidelines (from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence) give useful information on the timing of visits during pregnancy and a description of what will happen each time. Checking your baby's development and wellbeing At each antenatal appointment from 24 weeks of pregnancy, your midwife or doctor will check your baby's growth. To do this, they'll measure the distance from the top of your womb to your pubic bone. The measurement will be recorded in your notes. In the last weeks of pregnancy, you may also be asked to keep track of your baby's movements. If your baby's movements become less frequent, slow down or stop, contact your midwife or doctor immediately. You'll be offered an ultrasound scan if they have any concerns about how your baby is growing and developing. Your maternity notes At your booking appointment, your midwife will enter your details in a record book and will add to them at each visit. These are your maternity notes, sometimes called handheld notes. You\u2019ll be asked to keep your maternity notes at home and to bring them along to all your antenatal appointments. Take your notes with you wherever you go in case you need medical attention while you're away from home. Always ask your maternity team to explain anything in your notes that you don't understand. Waiting times in clinics can vary, and having to wait a long time for an appointment can be particularly difficult if you have young children with you. Planning ahead can make your visits easier, so here are some suggestions:  Write a list of any questions you want to ask and take it with you. Make sure you get answers to your questions or the opportunity to discuss any worries. If your partner is free, they may be able to go with you. This can make them feel more involved in the pregnancy. In some clinics you can buy refreshments. If not, take a snack with you if you're likely to get hungry. Find out about your schedule of antenatal appointments and what to expect at each one. Page last reviewed: 08\/01\/2015 Next review due: 08\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 321 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 198  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Meet the antenatal team Find out who's who in the team that provides your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Find out when your antenatal appointments will happen, and what to expect Ultrasound scans Find out about scans in pregnancy and discovering whether you're having a girl or boy Long-term conditions and pregnancy Find out the health issues that can affect pregnancy and antenatal care Related articles Antenatal classes  Meet the antenatal team Screening for Down's syndrome You straight after the birth Your baby after the birth  External links NHS antenatal screening timeline Community content from HealthUnlocked Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Dentists GP Maternity service Mental health information and support Parenting information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cyanosis (blue-tinged skin\/lips)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cyanosis","content":"Blue skin and lips (cyanosis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blue skin and lips (cyanosis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Blue skin and lips (cyanosis) Introduction  If a person's skin or lips turn blue, it's usually caused by low blood oxygen levels or poor circulation. It can be a sign of a serious problem, so it's important to seek medical advice. When blood becomes depleted of oxygen, it changes from bright red to darker in colour, and it's this that makes the skin and lips look blue. In darker-skinned people, the blue tinge may be easier to spot in the lips, gums and around the eyes. The medical name for this blue tinge is cyanosis. What to do Call 999 or go to your nearest hospital emergency department (A&E) immediately if you notice an adult or child suddenly turning blue, particularly if they have other symptoms, such as difficulty breathing or chest pain. This could be a sign of a life-threatening problem. See your GP or call NHS 111 if you have cyanosis that comes on very gradually, or affects just the fingers, hands, toes or feet. This is usually the result of a less serious problem with blood circulation, but it should still be checked by a doctor. Common causes of cyanosis Some of the main causes of cyanosis are described below, but you shouldn't use this to diagnose yourself \u2013 always leave that to a doctor. Cyanosis that just affects the hands, feet or limbs If just the fingers, toes or limbs have turned blue and feel cold, it's known as \"peripheral cyanosis\". The cause is usually poor circulation resulting from: Raynaud's phenomenon \u2013 where the blood supply to certain parts of the body, usually the fingers and toes, becomes temporarily reduced when exposed to cold temperatures peripheral arterial disease (PAD) \u2013 where a build-up of fatty deposits in the arteries restricts blood supply to the legs beta-blockers \u2013 medication commonly used to treat high blood pressure a blood clot blocking the blood supply to or from a limb Cyanosis that affects the skin generally and\/or lips When all the skin and\/or lips have a blue tinge, it's known as \"central cyanosis\" and is usually a sign of low levels of oxygen in the blood. Common causes for central cyanosis are listed below. A problem with the lungs: worsening of a long-term lung condition, such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) lung infections, such as pneumonia, bronchiolitis or whooping cough bronchiectasis \u2013 where the airways in the lungs become abnormally widened a pulmonary embolism \u2013 a blood clot in the arteries of the lungs neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS) or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) \u2013 where the lungs can't provide enough oxygen for the rest of the body drowning or nearly drowning A problem with the airways: choking \u2013 read what to do if someone is choking croup \u2013 a childhood condition, usually caused by a virus, that affects the airways and causes a barking cough epiglottitis \u2013 inflammation and swelling of the flap of tissue at the back of the throat, usually caused by infection anaphylaxis \u2013 a severe allergic reaction that can restrict the airways A problem with the heart: heart failure \u2013 where the heart fails to pump enough blood around the body congenital heart disease \u2013 a heart defect present at birth that can affect how blood travels around the heart and body cardiac arrest \u2013 where the heart stops beating Other causes: exposure to cold air or water being at high altitude seizures (fits) that last a long time a problem with the blood, such as abnormal haemoglobin (which means the blood cannot take up enough oxygen) or polycythaemia (a high concentration of red blood cells) Page last reviewed: 29\/05\/2015 Next review due: 29\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 180 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Find your nearest A&E department Breathing difficulties Does your child have a serious illness? External links Asthma UK British Lung Foundation Shortness of breath Why you should see a doctor if you're feeling breathless Asthma attack: what you need to do What to do in an asthma attack, including how to spot the warning signs and having a personal action plan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cyclical vomiting syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cyclical-vomiting-syndrome","content":"NHS Choices - cyclical vomiting syndrome Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cyclical vomiting syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cyclical vomiting syndrome Introduction  Cyclical vomiting syndrome (CVS) is a rare vomiting disorder most commonly seen in children, although it can affect adults too. Someone with CVS will frequently feel very sick and will vomit for hours, or even days, at a time. They will then recover from the episode and feel perfectly well, before experiencing another episode perhaps a month or so later.  These vomiting attacks are not explained by an infection or other illness. CVS can affect a person for months, years or even decades. Symptoms can be so severe that some sufferers may need to stay in bed and be treated in hospital during an episode. It can be a frightening condition that affects everyday life, but the cycle is possible to manage with lifestyle changes and medication. Read on to find out the answers to the following: What are the symptoms?  What is the likely cause?  Who is affected?  How is a diagnosis made?  How should I manage a vomiting episode?  Can vomiting attacks be prevented?  What are the possible complications? Further advice and support What are the symptoms? Someone with CVS will go through a regular cycle of feeling ill, recovering, feeling well and then feeling ill again. This cycle is made up of four phases: 1. Prodrome phase: feeling that an episode is about to start intense sweating and nausea for a few minutes to a few hours  2. Vomiting phase: retching and vomiting that often starts in the night or early morning vomiting up to five or six times an hour for at least one hour, for up to 10 days may not be able to move or respond  other possible symptoms: abdominal pain, diarrhoea, fever, dizziness, headache, sensitivity to light, extremely pale skin, drowsiness or unresponsiveness, drooling or spitting excess saliva 3. Recovery phase: vomiting and retching stop, and nausea subsides recovery is gradual or immediate 4. Well phase: a period of no symptoms \u2013 until the prodrome phase starts again The cycle tends to be regular and predictable: the same symptoms, starting at the same time of the day, for the same duration each time.   What is the likely cause? The cause of CVS is currently unknown, but there may be a link with migraines. Many people with CVS develop migraines, and migraine medicines have been shown to help treat the syndrome.  Vomiting episodes can sometimes be brought on by a trigger such as: emotional stress, excitement, anxiety or panic attacks an infection (such as a sinus infection or the flu) certain foods such as chocolate, cheese, cured meats and foods containing MSG caffeine hot weather menstrual periods motion sickness unhealthy eating habits \u2013 overeating, going without food for too long, or eating just before bedtime physical exhaustion or too much exercise sleep deprivation  Who is affected? CVS is most commonly seen in children \u2013 it's usually diagnosed at ages three to seven. Children who suffer migraines and sensitivity to light and sound are more likely to develop the condition. CVS can clear up by the time the child becomes an adult, although it can affect adults too. It's not known exactly how common CVS is, but one study suggests that it affects around three out of 100,000 children. How is a diagnosis made? A GP will take their patient's family and medical history, and a full account of their symptoms. A child may be suspected to have CVS if the following apply: they have had at least five vomiting episodes, or three separate episodes over six months the episodes of nausea and vomiting last from one hour to 10 days the episodes are similar each time they vomit at least four times an hour for at least one hour the vomiting is not caused by another disorder they are well between episodes Similarly, an adult may have CVS if they have had three or more vomiting episodes in the past year that have each been similar, with no nausea or vomiting between episodes.  The high frequency of vomiting, and the fact that it often starts at night or early morning, are clues that the cause may be CVS and not another condition. Blood or urine tests may be carried out (to rule out infection or kidney problems), and scans such as an endoscopy or abdominal ultrasound, to see if there is an abnormality in the digestive tract. Only after other conditions have been ruled out will a diagnosis of CVS be made. At this stage, the patient may have been referred to a gastroenterologist (specialist in digestive system disorders). How should I manage a vomiting episode? When a vomiting episode starts, it's a good idea to stay in bed in a dark, quiet room and take any medicines prescribed for this stage of the cycle. Keep taking small sips of fluid to prevent dehydration \u2013 either water, diluted squash, diluted fruit juice or semi-skimmed milk. Read about treating dehydration. After the vomiting attack has finished: drink plenty of fluids and gradually resume your normal diet take any medicines prescribed to prevent future episodes A child or adult who has been diagnosed with CVS will usually be under the care of a specialist, such as a gastroenterologist. Medication Drug treatment tends to be a process of trial and error. The patient may be given any of the following: medicine to prevent nausea and vomiting \u2013 such as ondansetron medicine for abdominal pain \u2013 such as ibuprofen medicine to control stomach acid production \u2013 such as ranitidine, lanzoprazole or omeprazole; find out more about these medicines migraine treatments \u2013 such as sumatriptan and propranolol; read about medicine to relieve the symptoms of migraine and prevent migraine It may take a while to find a medicine or combination of medicines that work, as not all these treatments work for everyone. Hospital treatment If nausea and vomiting is severe, hospital admission may be necessary. Medicine and fluids may need to be given intravenously (directly into a vein) to relieve symptoms and prevent dehydration. Nutrition may also need to be given intravenously if vomiting continues for days. Can vomiting attacks be prevented? It may be possible to prevent or lessen vomiting attacks by: avoiding known triggers \u2013 such as certain foods getting enough sleep  treating any sinus problems or allergies tackling any stress or anxiety eating small, carbohydrate-containing snacks between meals, before exercise and at bedtime (this can help prevent future attacks for some people) Some medicines used to prevent migraines may also help. What are the possible complications? Severe vomiting episodes can lead to: dehydration  oesophagitis (inflammation of the gullet lining) a tear in the lining of the gullet tooth decay  gastroparesis (where the stomach cannot empty itself of food in the normal way) gastroenteritis  Further advice and support  Cyclical Vomiting Syndrome Association UK Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/09\/2014 Next review due: 09\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 79 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Nausea and vomiting in adults Gastroenteritis Dehydration External links Cyclical Vomiting Syndrome Association UK Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cyclospora","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cyclospora","content":"Cyclospora - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cyclospora  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cyclospora Introduction  Cyclospora is an infection of the bowel caused by a tiny parasite called Cyclospora cayetanensis. It is usually caught from eating raw fruit and vegetables contaminated with human faeces (poo).  Diarrhoea, which can often be severe, is the most common symptom of cyclospora. Symptoms usually appear about a week after catching the parasite. Other symptoms can include: loss of appetite weight loss stomach cramps or pain bloating increased gas (flatulence) tiredness feeling sick (nausea) Less common symptoms include vomiting, body aches, headache, fever and other flu-like symptoms. Although these symptoms are often unpleasant, cyclospora doesn't usually pose a serious threat to health and can be easily treated using antibiotics. Some people with cyclospora don't have any symptoms. These are usually people who've grown up in a developing country and been previously exposed to the parasite. Who's at risk? People travelling to tropical or subtropical countries may be at increased risk of infection because cyclospora is common in many developing countries. Most of the cases reported in England and Wales involve people who'vereturned from trips to: the Caribbean Central and South America Turkey the Indian subcontinent the Far East There have been relatively few cases involving people holidaying in Africa. What causes cyclospora? Cyclospora is caught by consuming food \u2013 especially raw berries, herbs and salad items \u2013 or water contaminated with human faeces (poo) carrying theparasite. The parasite lives in the poo. You can't catch cyclospora by coming into contact with an infected person, such as someone who hasn\u2019t washed their handsafter going to the toilet. Once in the poo, the parasite takes about 10days before becoming infectious. Treating cyclospora If cyclospora isn't treated, the illness may last from a few days to a monthor longer. Symptoms may seem to go away and then return more than once. It'scommon to feel very tired. If you think you have cyclospora, you're advised to see your GP to check your symptoms. Mention your recent travel history. Cyclospora is treated with a course of antibiotics called co-trimoxazole. Preventing cyclospora The following hygiene measures will help reduce your risk of catchingcyclospora when travelling to affected areas: wash your hands (with soap and water) after going to the toilet wash hands before preparing or eating food make sure food is steaming hot avoid raw fruit and vegetables that haven't been washed in clean water only drink bottled water and avoid ice in drinks beware of any product that you suspect may have been tampered with, including bottled water   For more general advice about avoiding food poisoningwhile on holiday, read food and waterabroad.  Page last reviewed: 11\/08\/2015 Next review due: 11\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 7 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dehydration Gastroenteritis Food poisoning External links National Travel Health Network and Centre (Nathnac) Food and water abroad Find out how to protect yourself against illnesses in contaminated food and water Diarrhoea Diarrhoea is passing looser or more frequent stools than is normal for you. Find out what causes it and how to treat it Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cyclothymia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cyclothymia","content":"Cyclothymia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cyclothymia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cyclothymia Introduction  Cyclothymia, or cyclothymic disorder, is a mild form of bipolar disorder (manic depression). A person with cyclothymia will have a history of mood swings that range from mild depression to emotional highs. Most people's symptoms are mild enough that they do not seek mental health treatment, so cyclothymia often goes undiagnosed and untreated. However, the mood swings can disrupt your personal and work relationships. If you think you have cyclothymia, it may help to see your GP or seek advice from a mental health resource. Cyclothymia can progress into bipolar disorder and people often don't seek treatment until this late stage. How do I know I have cyclothymia? If you have cyclothymia, you'll have periods of low mood followed by periods of euphoria and excitement, when you don't need much sleep. The periods of low mood don't last long enough and aren't severe enough to merit a diagnosis of clinical depression, but they'll probably interfere with your ability to function on a day-to-day basis. Mood swings will be fairly frequent, as well as persistent \u2013 you'll have no more than two symptom-free months in a row. Your fluctuating moods need to have lasted at least two years (one year in childen and adolescents) for cyclothymia to be diagnosed. What are the causes? The causes of cyclothymia are unknown, but there is probably a genetic link \u2013 cyclothymia, clinical depression and bipolar disorder all tend to run in families. In some people, traumatic events or experiences may act as a trigger for the condition, such as severe illness or long periods of stress. Cyclothymia usually begins early in life and is equally common in both men and women. How is it treated? No medicines have been specifically approved for use in treating cyclothymia, but mood-stabilising medication and\/or antidepressants have been used in practice and may be helpful, along with psychotherapy. Mood stabilisers include: lithium \u2013 which is commonly used to treat bipolar disorder anti-epileptic drugs \u2013 such as carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine or sodium valproate Recently, some antipsychotics such as quetiapine have also been used as mood stabilisers. However, not all people with cyclothymia respond to medication. Psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), can be effective. CBT involves talking to a trained therapist to find ways to help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and behave. It can't remove your problems, but may help you manage them in a more positive way. Find your nearest depression support service. It may also help to join a support group, so you can talk to others who share your experiences and problems. You can also ask your GP if there's a local group you can join. Outlook It's not known how many people will go on to develop bipolar disorder. However, it's been estimated that less than half of people with cyclothymia see their elevated or depressed moods become more severe. Other people will find that their cyclothymia continues and they need to manage this as a lifelong condition, or that it disappears with time. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/11\/2014 Next review due: 12\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 211 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 68  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Clinical depression Cognitive behavioural therapy Psychotherapy Bipolar disorder External links Signpost UK: cyclothymia Bipolar UK Rethink Mental Illness: bipolar disorder Mind Depression Alliance Moodzone Feeling stressed, anxious or depressed? NHS Choices Moodzone can help you on your way to feeling better Depression support groups Talking to other people with a similar experience can help people cope with depression. Find out more Find mental health support Anxious, depressed or having problems coping? Find out how to get help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cyst (skin)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/skin-cyst","content":"Skin cyst - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Skin cyst  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Skin cyst Introduction  A skin cyst is a fluid-filled bump lying just underneath the skin. It's common and harmless, and may just go away without treatment. However, it can be hard to tell whether a lump is a cyst or something else that might need treatment. So, if you have any sort of lump, it's best to see your GP so it can be properly diagnosed. You can also read our page on lumps and swellings, to get a better idea of what your lump is. Some people confuse cysts with boils or skin abscesses. Boils and abscesses are painful collections of pus that indicate an infection. A cyst may go on to become a boil or abscess. This page covers everything you need to know about skin cysts. What does a cyst look like? A skin cyst looks like round, dome-shaped bump. It's yellow or whitish, often with a small dark plug through which you might be able to squeeze out pus. It can range in size from smaller than a pea to a few centimetres across, and grows slowly. Skin cysts don't usually hurt, but can become tender, sore and red if they become infected. Another sign of infection is foul-smelling pus coming out of it. Where are skin cysts found? Epidermoid cysts (one of the main types of cyst) are commonly found on the face, neck, chest, shoulders or skin around the genitals.  These cysts affect young and middle-aged adults, and are especially common in people with acne. They don't usually run in families. Some cysts form around the hair follicles. These are known as pilar cysts, and it's typical to find a few of these on the scalp. Unlike epidermoid cysts, pilar cysts strongly run in families. They typically affect middle-aged adults, and women more than men.  A cyst that forms on the eyelid is known as a chalazion, or meibomian cyst. Why do epidermoid and pilar cysts form? Some of the cells in the top layer of skin produce keratin, a protein that gives skin its strength and flexibility. Normally, these cells move up to the surface of the skin as they start to die, so they can be shed. But sometimes, these cells can move deeper into your skin and multiply, forming a sac. They secrete keratin into the middle of the sac, which forms a thick, yellow paste. This can ooze out of the cyst if it is burst. Anyone can develop a skin cyst, but you're more likely to have one if you've gone through puberty, you have a history of acne, or you have injured the skin (if you've damaged a hair follicle, for example). Skin cysts are not contagious. How are cysts treated? Cysts are usually harmless. If they're small and not bothering you, they can just be left alone. You might find it helps to hold a warm flannel against the skin, to encourage the cyst to heal and reduce any inflammation. Don't be tempted to pop the cyst, because if it's infected, you only risk spreading the infection and if the sac is left underneath the skin, it can grow back. If you think the cyst is infected, see your GP as you may need antibiotics. If the cyst is bothering you \u2013 for example, it's catching on your clothes or looks unpleasant \u2013 it can be removed. Your GP will use a local anaesthetic to numb your skin, make a tiny cut in the skin, and squeeze the cyst out. This procedure will leave a scar. Also, the cyst may still grow back at later date, especially if it was removed from the scalp or scrotum (pouch of skin containing the testicles). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 253 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 134  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Boil Skin abscess Eyelid cyst External links British Association of Dermatologists: epidermoid and pilar cysts Abscess An abscess is a painful collection of pus that is usually caused by a bacterial infection Boils A boil is a red, painful, lump on the skin that develops at the site of an infected hair follicle NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cystic fibrosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cystic-fibrosis","content":"Cystic fibrosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cystic fibrosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cystic-fibrosis Real stories cystic-fibrosis Clinical trials Cystic fibrosis cystic-fibrosis Symptoms cystic-fibrosis Causes cystic-fibrosis Diagnosis cystic-fibrosis Treatment   Cystic fibrosis is an inherited condition in which the lungs and digestive system can become clogged with thick, sticky mucus. It can cause problems with breathing and digestion from a young age. Over many years, the lungs become increasingly damaged and may eventually stop working properly. Most cases of cystic fibrosis in the UK are now identified through screening tests carried out soon after birth. It's estimated that 1 in every 2,500 babies born in the UK has cystic fibrosis. A number of treatments are available to help reduce the problems caused by the condition, but unfortunately average life expectancy is reduced for people who have it. This page covers: Symptoms of cystic fibrosis Causes of cystic fibrosis Screening and testing for cystic fibrosis Treatments for cystic fibrosis Outlook for cystic fibrosis Information about you Symptoms of cystic fibrosis Symptoms of cystic fibrosis tend to start in early childhood, although they can sometimes develop very soon after birth, or may not be obvious until adulthood. Some of the main symptoms of cystic fibrosis can include: recurring chest infections difficulty putting on weight frequent, wet-sounding coughs diarrhoea occasional wheezing and shortness of breath People with the condition can also develop a number of related conditions, including diabetes, thin, weakened bones (osteoporosis) and liver problems. Read more about the symptoms of cystic fibrosis. Causes of cystic fibrosis Cystic fibrosis is caused by a faulty gene that a child inherits from both of their parents. The faulty gene means that some cells struggle to move salt and water across the cell wall. This, along with recurrent infections, can result in a build-up of thick, sticky mucus in the body's tubes and passageways. To be born with cystic fibrosis, a child has to inherit two copies of this faulty gene \u2013 one from each of their parents. Their parents will not usually have the condition themselves, because they will only carry one faulty gene and one that works normally. If both parents carry the faulty gene, there's a 25% chance that each child they have will be born with cystic fibrosis. Read more about the causes of cystic fibrosis. Screening and testing for cystic fibrosis Most cases of cystic fibrosis are now detected soon after birth through the newborn blood spot test. This involves collecting a drop of blood from the baby's heel and testing it for abnormalities that could indicate cystic fibrosis. More tests will be needed to confirm the diagnosis, such as: a sweat test \u2013 to measure the amount of salt in sweat, as the sweat of someone with cystic fibrosis has higher levels of salt than normal a genetic test \u2013 where a sample of blood or saliva is checked for the faulty gene that causes cystic fibrosis These tests can also be carried out in older children and adults with symptoms of cystic fibrosis who haven't been screened previously. If you have a family history of cystic fibrosis, you can be tested to determine if you're at risk of having a child with the condition by checking if you're a \"carrier\" of the faulty gene that causes it. Read more about how cystic fibrosis is diagnosed. Treatments for cystic fibrosis There's currently no cure for cystic fibrosis, but a number of treatments are available to help control the symptoms, prevent complications, and make the condition easier to live with. Possible treatments include: antibiotics to prevent and treat chest infections medicines to make the mucus in the lungs thinner and easier to cough up medicines to widen the airways and reduce inflammation special techniques and devices to help clear mucus from the lungs medicines that help the person absorb food better following a special diet and taking supplements to prevent malnutrition A lung transplant may eventually be needed if the lungs become greatly damaged. Read more about treating cystic fibrosis. Outlook for cystic fibrosis Cystic fibrosis is a progressive condition, which means it tends to get worse over time. Eventually the condition can be fatal if it leads to a serious infection or the lungs stop working properly. The outlook for cystic fibrosis has improved considerably in recent years because of advancements in treatment, although most people with cystic fibrosis will have a shorter-than-average life expectancy. Currently, about half of the people with cystic fibrosis will live past the age of 40. Children born with the condition nowadays are likely to live longer than this. Information about you If you or your child has cystic fibrosis, your clinical team will pass information about you\/your child on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. The Cystic Fibrosis Trust The UK's leading charity for people affected by cystic fibrosis is the Cystic Fibrosis Trust. Its website contains a range of useful information, an online forum and news items about ongoing research into cystic fibrosis. The charity also operates a helpline \u2013 0300 373 1000 \u2013 which is available from 9am and 5pm, Monday to Friday. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 21\/03\/2016 Next review due: 21\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1193 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 649  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 151  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 315  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cystic fibrosis Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Cystic fibrosis affects the internal organs, especially the lungs and digestive system, which become clogged with thick, sticky mucus. It is caused by a faulty gene that controls the movement of salt and water in and out of cells in the body. Dr Alan Day explains how the disorder is treated. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Newborn blood spot test Lung transplant Heart and lungs news External links Cystic Fibrosis Trust Genetic Alliance UK NHS Screening leaflet: cystic fibrosis is suspected (PDF, 302kb) Cystic fibrosis won't stop me singing Recording artist and performer Bianca Nicholas explains how singing helps with her cystic fibrosis Special needs in children If your child has a health condition or disability, they may need specialised healthcare and help at school NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cystitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cystitis","content":"Cystitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cystitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cystitis Clinical trials Cystitis Cystitis Symptoms Cystitis Causes Cystitis Treatment Introduction  Cystitis is inflammation of the bladder, usually caused by a bladder infection. It's a common type of urinary tract infection (UTI), particularly in women, and is usually more of a nuisance than a cause for serious concern. Mild cases will often get better by themselves within a few days. However, some people experience episodes of cystitis frequently and may need regular or long-term treatment. There's also a chance that cystitis could lead to a more serious kidney infection in some cases, so it's important to seek medical advice if your symptoms don't improve. Signs and symptoms of cystitis The main symptoms of cystitis include: pain, burning or stinging when you pee needing to pee more often and urgently than normal urine that's dark, cloudy or strong smelling pain low down in your tummy feeling generally unwell, achy, sick and tired Possible symptoms in young children include a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above, weakness, irritability, reduced appetite and vomiting. Read more about the symptoms of cystitis. When to see your GP Women don't necessarily need to see their GP if they have cystitis, as mild cases often get better without treatment. You can try the self-help measures listed below, or ask your pharmacist for advice. See your GP if: you're not sure whether you have cystitis your symptoms don't start to improve within a few days you get cystitis frequently you have severe symptoms, such as blood in your urine, a fever or pain in your side you're pregnant and have symptoms of cystitis you're a man and have symptoms of cystitis your child has symptoms of cystitis Your GP should be able to diagnose cystitis by asking about your symptoms. They may test a sample of your urine for bacteria to help confirm the diagnosis. What causes cystitis? Most cases are thought to occur when bacteria that live harmlessly in the bowel or on the skin get into the bladder through the urethra (tube that carries urine out of your body). It's not always clear how this happens, but it can be caused by: having sex wiping your bottom after going to the toilet \u2013 particularly if you wipe from back to front inserting a tampon or urinary catheter (a thin tube inserted into the urethra to drain the bladder) using a diaphragm for contraception Women may get cystitis more often than men because their anus (back passage) is closer to their urethra, and their urethra is much shorter, which means bacteria may be able to get into the bladder more easily. Read more about the causes of cystitis. Treatments for cystitis If you see your GP with cystitis, you'll usually be prescribed antibiotics to treat the infection. These should start to have an effect within a day or two. If you've had cystitis before and don't feel you need to see your GP, you may want to treat your symptoms at home. Until you're feeling better, it may help to: take paracetamol or ibuprofen drink plenty of water hold a hot water bottle on your tummy or between your thighs avoid having sex Some people find it helpful to try over-the-counter products that reduce the acidity of their urine (such as sodium bicarbonate or potassium citrate), but there's a lack of evidence to suggest they're effective. If you keep getting cystitis, your GP may give you an antibiotic prescription to take to a pharmacy whenever you develop symptoms, without needing to see your doctor first. Your GP can also prescribe a low dose of antibiotics for you to take continuously over several months. Read more about treating cystitis. Preventing cystitis If you get cystitis frequently, there are some things you can try that may stop it coming back. However, it's not clear how effective most of these measures are. These measures include: not using perfumed bubble bath, soap or talcum powder around your genitals \u2013 use plain, unperfumed varieties having a shower, rather than a bath \u2013 this avoids exposing your genitals to the chemicals in your cleaning products for too long going to the toilet as soon as you need to pee and always emptying your bladder fully staying well hydrated \u2013 drinking plenty of fluids may help to stop bacteria multiplying in your bladder  always wiping your bottom from front to back when you go to the toilet emptying your bladder as soon as possible after having sex not using a diaphragm for contraception \u2013 you may wish to use another method of contraception instead wearing underwear made from cotton, rather than synthetic material such as nylon, and not wearing tight jeans and trousers Drinking cranberry juice has traditionally been recommended as a way of reducing your chances of getting cystitis. However, large studies have suggested it doesn't make a significant difference. Interstitial cystitis If you have long-term or frequent pelvic pain and problems peeing, you may have a condition called interstitial cystitis. This is a poorly understood bladder condition that mostly affects middle-aged women. Unlike regular cystitis, there's no obvious infection in the bladder and antibiotics don't help. However, your doctor may be able to recommend a number of other treatments to reduce your symptoms. Read more about interstitial cystitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/08\/2015 Next review due: 14\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1208 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 616  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 341  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Interstitial cystitis Kidney infection Urinary tract infection in adults Urinary tract infection in children External links COB Foundation: cystitis Check your bladder A lot can be done to help bladder problems. Take this test to see if you need further advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Interstitial cystitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/interstitial-cystitis","content":"Interstitial cystitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Interstitial cystitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview interstitial-cystitis Clinical trials interstitial-cystitis Community Interstitial cystitis Introduction  Interstitial cystitis is a poorly understood bladder condition that causes long-term pelvic pain and problems with urination. It's also known as \"painful bladder syndrome\" or \"bladder pain syndrome\". The condition tends to first affect people in their 30s and 40s, and is much more common in women than men. It can have a significant impact on your lifestyle, work, emotional health and relationships, but a number of different treatments can be tried to help relieve the symptoms. Symptoms of interstitial cystitis The main symptoms of interstitial cystitis are: intense pelvic pain (felt below your bellybutton) sudden, strong urges to pee needing to pee more often than normal waking up several times during the night to go to the toilet The pain may be worse when your bladder is full and may be temporarily relieved when you go to the toilet. You might also find the pain is worse during periods or after having certain foods or drinks. The symptoms will often come and go in phases. You may have episodes lasting days, weeks or months where your symptoms improve, followed by times when they're worse. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you have persistent pelvic pain or you notice a change in your usual pattern of urination. These symptoms can have a number of causes, so it's a good idea to get a proper diagnosis. Your GP can refer you to a hospital specialist such as a urologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the urinary system) for further tests, such as a cystoscopy (a procedure to examine the inside of the bladder). What causes interstitial cystitis? The exact cause of interstitial cystitis isn't clear. Unlike other types of cystitis, there's no obvious infection in the bladder and antibiotics don't help. In some people with the condition, the bladder is inflamed, ulcerated, scarred or stiff. There are several theories about the possible cause of the condition, including: damage to the bladder lining, which may mean urine can irritate the bladder and surrounding muscles and nerves a problem with the pelvic floor muscles (used to control urination) your immune system mistakenly attacking your bladder an allergic reaction It's also been suggested that interstitial cystitis may be a symptom of a more widespread problem, as it's been associated with conditions such as fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and lupus. Treatments for interstitial cystitis Unfortunately, there's currently no cure for interstitial cystitis and it can be difficult to treat, although a number of treatments can be tried. No single treatment works for everyone, however, and there's disagreement about how effective some of them are. You may need to try several treatments to find one that works for you. Lifestyle changes will usually be recommended first. Medications and other therapies may be used if these don't help, and surgery may be necessary as a last resort. Lifestyle changes Lifestyle changes that may help improve your symptoms include: reducing stress \u2013 anything that helps you relax, such as exercise or regular warm baths, may help reduce your symptoms avoiding certain foods or drinks (such as tomatoes and alcohol) if you notice they make your symptoms worse \u2013 but don't make significant changes to your diet without seeking medical advice first stopping smoking \u2013 the chemicals you breathe in while smoking may irritate your bladder controlling how much you drink \u2013 try to reduce the amount you drink before going to bed planned toilet breaks \u2013 taking regular planned toilet breaks may help stop your bladder becoming too full You may also find it useful to contact a support group, such as the Interstitial Cystitis Association or the Cystitis and Overactive Bladder (COB) Foundation for information and advice about living with interstitial cystitis. Medication Tablets or capsules may be used to treat people with interstitial cystitis, including: over-the-counter painkillers \u2013 such as paracetamol and ibuprofen over-the-counter antihistamines \u2013 such as loratadine and cetirizine stronger painkillers available on prescription \u2013 such as amitriptyline, gabapentin and pregabalin tolterodine, solifenacin or mirabegron \u2013 these help relax the bladder muscles pentosan polysulphate sodium (Elmiron) \u2013 this may help repair the bladder lining Some medications can also be passed directly into the bladder using a thin tube called a catheter. These are known as intravesical medications or bladder instillations. Examples of intravesical medications include lignocaine (a local anaesthetic that numbs the bladder) and hyaluronic acid or chondroitin sulphate (medications that may help restore the bladder lining). Supportive therapies and treatments Some people also find the following therapies and supportive treatments helpful: physiotherapy \u2013 massaging the pelvic floor muscles may help reduce any strain on your bladder bladder retraining \u2013 where you gradually learn to be able to hold more urine in your bladder before needing to go to the toilet psychological therapy \u2013 to help you cope with your symptoms and their impact on your life transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) \u2013 where a small battery-operated device is used to relieve pain by sending electrical impulses into your body Surgery and procedures Surgery and other procedures may be recommended if you have clear abnormal areas (lesions) in your bladder or other treatments don't work. Procedures that may be carried out include: cauterisation \u2013 where ulcers inside the bladder are sealed using an electrical current or laser bladder distension \u2013 where the bladder is stretched with fluid, which can aid diagnosis and may temporarily relieve your symptoms botulinum toxin injections \u2013 where a substance called botulinum toxin (such as Botox) is injected directly into your bladder to temporarily relieve your symptoms neuromodulation \u2013 where an implant that stimulates your nerves with electricity is placed in your body to relieve pain and reduce sudden urges to pee augmentation \u2013 making the bladder larger using part of the small intestine; this usually also includes removing any inflamed areas of the bladder In very rare cases, it may be necessary to remove the bladder completely (cystectomy). If this is done, your surgeon will need to create an alternative way for urine to leave your body. This will usually be through a small hole in your tummy called a stoma, but might involve making a new bladder using part of your small intestine (bladder reconstruction). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 13\/08\/2015 Next review due: 13\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 234 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cystitis Living with pain Pelvic pain External links Cystitis and Overactive Bladder (COB) Foundation: interstitial cystitis Interstitial Cystitis Association (ICA) International Painful Bladder Association: interstitial cystitis (PDF, 642kb) Pelvic Pain Support Network Check your bladder A lot can be done to help bladder problems. Take this test to see if you need further advice Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cystocele","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prolapse-of-the-uterus","content":"Pelvic organ prolapse - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic organ prolapse  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prolapse-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Pelvic organ prolapse Prolapse-of-the-uterus Treatment Introduction  Pelvic organ prolapse is bulging of one or more of the pelvic organs into the vagina. These organs are the uterus, vagina, bowel and bladder. Symptoms may include: a sensation of a bulge or something coming down or out of the vagina, which sometimes needs to be pushed back discomfort during sex problems passing urine \u2013 such as slow stream, a feeling of not emptying the bladder fully, needing to urinate more often and leaking a small amount of urine when you cough, sneeze or exercise (stress incontinence) Some women with a pelvic organ prolapse don't have any symptoms and the condition is only discovered during an internal examination for another reason, such as a cervical screening. When to see your GP Pelvic organ prolapse isn't life-threatening, but it can affect your quality of life. See your GP if you have any of the symptoms of a prolapse, or if you notice a lump in or around your vagina. Internal pelvic examination Your doctor will need to carry out an internal pelvic examination. They'll ask you to undress from the waist down and lie back on the examination bed, while they feel for any lumps in your pelvic area. Some women may put off going to their GP if they're embarrassed or worried about what the doctor may find. However, the examination is important, only takes a few minutes and is similar to having a smear test. Further tests If you have bladder symptoms, such as needing to rush to the toilet or leaking when you cough and sneeze, further tests may need to be carried out in hospital. For example, a small tube (catheter) may be inserted into your bladder to examine your bladder function and identify any leakage problems. This test is known as urodynamics. Your doctor will decide if further tests are needed before treating the prolapse. Types of prolapse If pelvic organ prolapse is confirmed, it will usually be staged to indicate how severe it is. Most often, a number system is used, ranging from one to four, with four indicating a severe prolapse. Pelvic organ prolapse can affect the front, top or back of the vagina. The main types of prolapse are: anterior prolapse (cystocele) \u2013 where the bladder bulges into the front wall of the vagina prolapse of the uterus and cervix or top of the vagina \u2013 which can be the result of previous treatment to remove the womb (hysterectomy) posterior wall prolapse (rectocoele or enterocoele) \u2013 when the bowel bulges forward into the back wall of the vagina It's possible to have more than one of these types of prolapse at the same time. Why does prolapse happen? Prolapse is caused by weakening of tissues that support the pelvic organs. Although there's rarely a single cause, the risk of developing pelvic organ prolapse can be increased by: your age \u2013 prolapse is more common as you get older childbirth, particularly if you had a long or difficult labour, or gave birth to multiple babies or a large baby \u2013 up to half of all women who have had children are affected by some degree of prolapse changes caused by the menopause \u2013 such as weakening of tissue and low levels of the hormone oestrogen being overweight, obese or having large fibroids (non-cancerous tumours in or around the womb) or pelvic cysts \u2013 which creates extra pressure in the pelvic area previous pelvic surgery \u2013 such as a hysterectomy or bladder repair repeated heavy lifting and manual work long-term coughing or sneezing \u2013 for example, if you smoke, have a lung condition or allergy excessive straining when going to the toilet because of long-term constipation Certain conditions can also cause the tissues in your body to become weak, making a prolapse more likely, including: joint hypermobility syndrome \u2013 where your joints are very loose Marfan syndrome \u2013 an inherited condition that affects the blood vessels, eyes and skeleton Ehlers-Danlos syndrome \u2013 a group of inherited conditions that affect collagen proteins in the body Can a prolapse be prevented? There are several things you can do to reduce your risk of prolapse, including: doing regular pelvic floor exercises maintaining a healthy weight or losing weight if you're overweight eating a high-fibre diet with plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and wholegrain bread and cereal to avoid constipation and straining when going to the toilet avoiding heavy lifting If you smoke, stopping smoking may also help to reduce your risk of a prolapse. How is prolapse treated? Many women with prolapse don't need treatment, as the problem doesn't seriously interfere with their normal activities. Lifestyle changes such as weight loss and pelvic floor exercises are usually recommended in mild cases. If the symptoms require treatment, a prolapse may be treated effectively using a device inserted into the vagina, called a vaginal pessary. This helps to hold the prolapsed organ in place. Surgery may also be an option for some women. This usually involves giving support to the prolapsed organ. In some cases, complete removal of the womb (hysterectomy) is required, especially if the womb has prolapsed out. Most women experience a better quality of life after surgery, but there's a risk of problems remaining or even getting worse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/02\/2015 Next review due: 05\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1570 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 633  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 471  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 170  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 215  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Hysterectomy Urinary incontinence Women's health 40-60 External links MHRA: safety of vaginal meshes for pelvic organ prolapse NICE: infracoccygeal sacropexy using mesh NICE: insertion of mesh uterine suspension sling NHS leaflet: what is a sacrospinous fixation? (PDF, 65Kb) NICE: sacrocolpopexy with hysterectomy using mesh Women's Health Concern: prolapse Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Your body after childbirth Having a baby changes your body. Here's how it may change and some exercises and techniques to help. Find and choose services for Prolapse of the uterus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cystoscopy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cystoscopy","content":"Cystoscopy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cystoscopy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cystoscopy Clinical trials Cystoscopy Cystoscopy Why it is used Cystoscopy How it is performed Cystoscopy Recovery Cystoscopy Risks Introduction  A cystoscopy is a medical procedure used to examine the inside of the bladder using an instrument called a cystoscope. A cystoscope is a thin, fibre optic tube that has a light and a camera at one end. It's inserted into the urethra (the tube that carries urine out of the body) and moved up into the bladder. The camera relays images to a screen, where they can be seen by the urologist (specialist in treating bladder conditions). There are two types of cystoscope: flexible cystoscope \u2013 a thin, flexible tube used when the only purpose of a cystoscopy is to look inside your bladder rigid cystoscope \u2013 a thin, straight metal tube used for passing small surgical instruments down through the cystoscope to remove a tissue sample or carry out treatment Most cystoscopies are carried out as outpatient procedures, so you'll be able to go home on the same day. Read more about what happens during a cystoscopy Why cystoscopies are used A cystoscopy can be used to investigate and treat symptoms and conditions that affect the bladder and urinary system. For example, it can be used to: check for abnormalities in the bladder remove a sample of bladder tissue for further testing (a biopsy) in cases of suspected cancer treat certain bladder conditions, such as removing small bladder stones Read more about why a cystoscopy might be used. Is a cystoscopy painful? A flexible cystoscopy is usually carried out using a local anaesthetic gel or spray to numb the urethra. This will reduce any discomfort when the cystoscope is inserted into the urethra. A rigid cystoscopy is usually carried out under general anaesthetic (where you're asleep), or a spinal anaesthetic (epidural) that numbs all feeling below your spine. However, for some people, the procedure may feel uncomfortable and can lead to mild side effects afterwards, such as muscle pain and nausea. For a few days after the procedure, you may feel a burning sensation when passing urine and you may also pass blood in your urine. This is normal and isn't something to worry about, unless it's severe and lasts longer than a few days. Read more about recovering from a cystoscopy. Risks It's rare to experience serious complications after having a cystoscopy, but some people experience persistent bleeding or problems passing urine. There's also a small risk of developing a urinary tract infection that affects your urethra, bladder or kidneys. See your GP if you experience the symptoms of infection, such as a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above. Read more about the possible complications of a cystoscopy. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/04\/2015 Next review due: 29\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 310 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 151  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cystoscopy Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A cystoscopy is a procedure that examines the inside of the bladder. Surgeon Gurminder Mann explains how it's performed. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Bladder cancer Bladder stones Urinary tract infections Kidney health External links Cancer Research UK Kidney problems What can go wrong with your kidneys and why, including kidney disease, kidney stones and kidney cancer Hospital admissions Find out what happens when you are admitted to hospital, including what forms to fill in or tests to undergo Find and choose services for Cystoscopy Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cytomegalovirus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cytomegalovirus","content":"Cytomegalovirus (CMV) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cytomegalovirus (CMV)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cytomegalovirus Clinical trials Cytomegalovirus Cytomegalovirus Symptoms Cytomegalovirus Causes Cytomegalovirus Treatment Cytomegalovirus Prevention Introduction  Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a common virus that belongs to the herpes family of viruses.  It's spread through bodily fluids, such as saliva and urine, and can be passed on through close contact with young children, such as when changing nappies. CMV can also be passed on through kissing, having sex, or receiving an infected organ during an organ transplant. Read more about the causes of CMV infections. Most cases of CMV don't cause symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they're often similar to flu or glandular fever, and include a high temperature (fever), sore throat and swollen glands. Read more about the symptoms of CMV. Stages of infection You can get CMV at any age, but many people are first infected during childhood and are unaware they've been infected.  When you develop a CMV infection for the first time, it's known as primary CMV. It's thought that 50-80% of adults in the UK are infected with CMV. Once you've been infected, the CMV virus stays in your body for the rest of your life, but in most cases it remains inactive and doesn't cause further problems. However, CMV can sometimes be reactivated (recur). This usually only occurs in people who have a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, due to untreated HIV or taking immunosuppressant medication to prevent transplanted organs being rejected. It's also possible to become infected again with a different strain of the CMV virus. This is known as reinfection and usually causes similar symptoms to a primary infection. \u201CActive CMV\u201D is a term that describes someone who's infectious to another person and can be due to primary infection, reinfection or reactivation. Congenital CMV If a pregnant woman has an active CMV infection, the virus can be passed to her unborn baby. When it affects a baby in the womb, it's known as congenital CMV. In the UK, it's estimated that one to two babies in every 200 will be born with congenital CMV. Of these, about 13% will have problems at birth, such as hearing loss and learning difficulties, with a similar number developing problems later on. Treating a CMV infection CMV isn't usually diagnosed because it doesn't cause symptoms for most people. If you're at risk of developing complications, a blood test can help determine whether you've ever had CMV or if you've recently caught it for the first time. Urine and saliva swab tests can be used to find out whether a newborn baby has congenital CMV. Most CMV infections are mild, don't cause symptoms and don't need to be treated. If you do have symptoms, painkillers can be used to help reduce any pain or fever. Active CMV in someone with a weakened immune system is usually treated with antiviral medicines, which slow the spread of the virus. Some cases may need to be treated in hospital. Babies with congenital CMV may also need antiviral treatment. Read more about treating CMV. Preventing a CMV infection It's not always possible to prevent the spread of CMV, but you can reduce your risk by practising good hygiene, such as regularly washing your hands with soap and warm water. This is particularly important after changing nappies. You should also try to avoid coming into contact with the saliva of young children. Research is currently being carried out to find a possible vaccine for CMV. However, it's unlikely that a vaccine will be available for several years. Read more about preventing CMV. Cells infected with cytomegalovirus (CMV)  Page last reviewed: 17\/11\/2014 Next review due: 17\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 124 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Hearing impairment HIV and AIDS Infections during pregnancy Pregnancy and CMV External links AVERT: common HIV opportunistic infections BCM: about CMV CMV Action Pneumonia Pneumonia causes the tissue in one or both lungs to become inflamed. It's usually caused by an infection Find and choose services for Cytomegalovirus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}