{"conditions":[{"name":"Obesity","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Obesity","content":"Obesity - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Obesity  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Obesity Clinical trials Obesity Obesity Causes Obesity Diagnosis Obesity Treatment   The term 'obese' describes a person who's very overweight, with a lot of body fat. It's a common problem in the UK that's estimated to affect around one in every four adults and around one in every five children aged 10 to 11. Defining obesity There are many ways in which a person's health in relation to their weight can be classified, but the most widely used method is body mass index (BMI). BMI is a measure of whether you're a healthy weight for your height. You can use the BMI healthy weight calculator to work out your score. For most adults, a BMI of: 18.5 to 24.9 means you're a healthy weight 25 to 29.9 means you're overweight 30 to 39.9 means you're obese 40 or above means you're severely obese BMI isn't used to definitively diagnose obesity, because people who are very muscular sometimes have a high BMI without excess fat. But for most people, BMI is a useful indication of whether they're a healthy weight, overweight or obese. A better measure of excess fat is waist circumference, which can be used as an additional measure in people who are overweight (with a BMI of 25 to 29.9) or moderately obese (with a BMI of 30 to 34.9). Generally, men with a waist circumference of 94cm (37in) or more and women with a waist circumference of 80cm (about 31.5in) or more are more likely to develop obesity-related health problems. Read more about diagnosing obesity. Risks of obesity It's very important to take steps to tackle obesity because, as well as causing obvious physical changes, it can lead to a number of serious and potentially life-threatening conditions, such as: type 2 diabetes  coronary heart disease  some types of cancer, such as breast cancer and bowel cancer stroke Obesity can also affect your quality of life and lead to psychological problems, such as depression and low self-esteem (see below for more information about the health problems associated with obesity). Causes of obesity Obesity is generally caused by consuming more calories \u2013 particularly those in fatty and sugary foods \u2013 than you burn off through physical activity. The excess energy is stored by the body as fat. Obesity is an increasingly common problem because for many people modern living involves eating excessive amounts of cheap, high-calorie food and spending a lot of time sitting down, at desks, on sofas or in cars. Read about why sitting too much is bad for your health. There are also some underlying health conditions that can occasionally contribute to weight gain, such as an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism), although these type of conditions don\u2019t usually cause weight problems if they're effectively controlled with medication. Read more about the causes of obesity. Treating obesity The best way to treat obesity is to eat a healthy, reduced-calorie diet and exercise regularly. To do this you should: eat a balanced, calorie-controlled diet as recommended by your GP or weight loss management health professional (such as a dietitian) join a local weight loss group take up activities such as fast walking, jogging, swimming or tennis for 150 to 300 minutes (two-and-a-half to five hours) a week eat slowly and avoid situations where you know you could be tempted to overeat You may also benefit from receiving psychological support from a trained healthcare professional to help change the way you think about food and eating. If lifestyle changes alone don't help you lose weight, a medication called orlistat may be recommended. If taken correctly, this medication works by reducing the amount of fat you absorb during digestion. Your GP will know whether orlistat is suitable for you. In rare cases, weight loss surgery may be recommended. Read more about the NHS weight loss guide and how obesity is treated. Other obesity-related problems Obesity can cause a number of further problems, including difficulties with daily activities and serious health conditions. Day-to-day problems related to obesity include: breathlessness increased sweating snoring difficulty doing physical activity often feeling very tired joint and back pain low confidence and self-esteem feeling isolated The psychological problems associated with being obese can also affect your relationships with family and friends, and may lead to depression. Serious health conditions Being obese can also increase your risk of developing many potentially serious health conditions, including: type 2 diabetes \u2013 a condition that causes a person's blood sugar level to become too high high blood pressure high cholesterol and atherosclerosis (where fatty deposits narrow your arteries), which can lead to coronary heart disease and stroke asthma metabolic syndrome \u2013 a combination of diabetes, high blood pressure and obesity several types of cancer, including bowel cancer, breast cancer and womb cancer gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) \u2013 where stomach acid leaks out of the stomach and into the oesophagus (gullet) gallstones \u2013 small stones, usually made of cholesterol, that form in the gallbladder reduced fertility osteoarthritis \u2013 a condition involving pain and stiffness in your joints sleep apnoea \u2013 a condition that causes interrupted breathing during sleep, which can lead to daytime sleepiness with an increased risk of road traffic accidents, as well as a greater risk of diabetes, high blood pressure and heart disease liver disease and kidney disease pregnancy complications, such as gestational diabetes or pre-eclampsia (when a woman experiences a potentially dangerous rise in blood pressure during pregnancy) Obesity reduces life expectancy by an average of 3 to 10 years, depending on how severe it is. It's estimated that obesity and being overweight contribute to at least 1 in every 13 deaths in Europe. Outlook There's no \"quick fix\" for obesity. Weight loss programmes take time and commitment, and work best when fully completed. The healthcare professionals involved with your care should provide encouragement and advice about how to maintain the weight loss achieved. Regularly monitoring your weight, setting realistic goals and involving your friends and family with your attempts to lose weight can also help. Remember that even losing what seems like a small amount of weight, such as 3% or more of your original body weight, and maintaining this for life, can significantly reduce your risk of developing obesity-related complications like diabetes and heart disease. Couch to 5K If it's been a long time since you did any exercise, you should check out the NHS Choices Couch to 5K running plan. It consists of podcasts delivered over the course of nine weeks and has been specifically designed for absolute beginners. To begin with, you start running for short periods of time, and as the plan progresses, gradually increase the amount. At the end of the nine weeks, you should be able to run for 30 minutes non-stop, which for most people is around five kilometres (3.1 miles). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/06\/2016 Next review due: 15\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1517 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 628  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 574  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links BMI calculator Exercise: getting started High blood pressure Healthy eating Losing weight Obesity news Weight loss surgery Find weight loss support External links Food Standards Agency British Dietetic Association National Obesity Forum Weight Concern Weight Wise Overweight and pregnant Being very overweight can cause problems in pregnancy. Find out the risks and what you can do Very overweight children: advice for parents Practical advice for parents of very overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and suitable physical activity Who should have a flu jab? Certain people need a flu jab, including over-65s; very overweight people; anyone with a long term health condition and pregnant women NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find weight loss support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=WeightLoss","content":"Find Weight loss support groups services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Weight loss support groups services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Weight loss","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Loseweight\/Pages\/Loseweighthome.aspx","content":"Lose weight - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lose weight Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Weight loss support Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Start the NHS weight loss plan Develop healthier eating habits and get more active with the NHS Choices weight loss guide. 'I did 10 diets in 50 days and found one that really worked' Bored with yo-yo dieting, Andy tried 10 diets in 50 days in the hope of finding one he could stick to for life. 'I remember being 10 years old and feeling fat' Christine says the NHS weight loss plan helped her overcome a love-hate relationship with food 'I want to be a good role model for my daughter' Phil says the weight loss plan has left him feeling healthier, fitter and more confident. Nine medical reasons for putting on weight Nine medical reasons that could explain why you're putting on weight. The truth about carbs We sort the wheat from the chaff to bring you the evidence-based truth about carbs. Top diets review for 2016 Find a weight loss plan to suit you with our review of the most popular diets. 10 surprising 100-calorie snacks Keep hunger at bay with these low-calorie twists on some of the nation's favourite snacks. Healthy breakfasts (for people who hate breakfast) Get into the habit of eating breakfast with these delicious calorie-counted breakfasts. What's your BMI? Are you a healthy weight for your height? Use this simple interactive tool to find out. Start losing weight Begin your weight loss journey today with these tips on diet and physical activity to get started on losing weight. Britain: 'the fat man of Europe' The story of Britain's obesity crisis, including latest statistics, causes and health risks. Top sources of added sugar in our diet From cola, chocolate and ketchup to beer, yoghurt and soup, find out where most of the added sugar in our diet lurks. The truth about sweeteners Find out the evidence on the safety of some of the most common sweeteners available in the UK. Should you lose weight fast? A steady rate of weight loss will produce results that really last. Hidden causes of weight gain Could cheap food, email, stress or late nights be causing you to put on weight? Healthy food swaps Stop eating high-calorie foods and swap them for a healthy, balanced alternative. Eight tips for healthy eating Start eating well with these eight tips for a healthy diet. Diet danger zones Temptation is never far away when you're trying to lose weight. Learn how to handle those diet danger zones. How to diet Find out why some diets are bad for you, plus how to lose weight the healthy way. Very low calorie diets A VLCD contains fewer than 1,000 calories a day. Find out if it's right for you. Food labels How to understand food labels and make healthier choices when shopping. Understanding calories Calories mean energy, and the right energy balance is the key to a healthy weight. How can I speed up my metabolism? What can you do to give your metabolism a boost to help you lose weight? Height\/weight chart Use this chart to check if you're the right weight for your height. Keep weight off Keep losing weight only to regain it? Find out how to make your weight loss stick. How your GP can help you lose weight What your GP can do to help if you have a weight problem. 10-minute workouts Choose from six 10-minute home workouts to improve your general fitness and tone your abs, legs, buttocks and triceps. The 10,000 steps challenge Walking 10,000 steps a day can build stamina, burn excess calories and give you a healthier heart. 'I ran a marathon after losing weight' Christine ran her very first marathon after losing weight with the NHS weight loss plan. My 12-week weight loss journey Stephanie Higgins tells how she lost 9.2kg with the NHS weight loss plan without ever going hungry. Weight loss: 'I knew I had to change' Robert Langston was overweight, asthmatic and diabetic. Find out how he turned his life around. 'Is weight loss surgery right for me?' If you've tried lifestyle changes, surgery might be right for you. But it's not an easy option. Vicky's story: 'My gastric band surgery' Vicky talks about the changes she had to make to her diet before and after weight loss surgery, and what it's like living with a gastric band. 'Slimming clubs helped me lose weight' Mother-of-four Cheryl Taylor tells how slimming clubs helped her drop nine dress sizes in two years and turn her life around. Weight loss wonders Brendan and Debbie Byrne lost weight together when they swapped takeaways for healthy home cooking. How to stay motivated When you're trying to lose weight, it can be tough to stay motivated. Real-life slimmers share tips that work. 'I beat middle-age spread' Julie Thompson put on weight during the menopause. When she hit 79kg, she joined a slimming club. 'Weight loss feels great' Nick Green's weight rocketed when he stopped smoking. But with a healthy diet and exercise, he lost more than 40kg and got fit. 'I weighed 70kg at age 11' Chris Bennington, 14, lost more than a stone when he swapped pizza and chips for healthy pasta. Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked Want to lose weight? Sign up for email support Sign up form First name, last name (optional) Your email address Confirm email address By clicking on the button below you are agreeing to our terms and conditions. View our privacy policy. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Probiotics Many health claims are made about probiotics. Find out when they might help and when to be sceptical Overweight children: advice for parents Practical advice for parents of overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and physical activity Is green tea a superfood? From weight loss wonder to cancer cure, we review the evidence surrounding the health claims made about green tea Weight loss myths Do slimming pills work? Is healthy food expensive? The truth behind 10 common myths about weight loss Bodybuilding and sports supplements Supplements are popular for people wanting to lose weight and build muscle, but some are illegal and dangerous Cut down on your calories Many of us are eating too much and not being active enough. Find out how to cut the calories Strength and Flex Download our Strength and flexibility podcast series and get a free personal trainer 5K+ running podcasts for C25K graduates Take your running to the next level with new podcasts for Couch to 5K graduates Health and fitness Boost your health and fitness with fun and practical ideas to get active and improve your general health Food and diet Find out how to achieve a healthy, nutritious diet to help you look and feel your best Superfoods: the evidence We examine the evidence behind the health claims made about the most popular superfoods NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Weight loss surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/weight-loss-surgery","content":"Weight loss surgery - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Weight loss surgery  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Weight loss surgery weight-loss-surgery Who can have it weight-loss-surgery Getting ready weight-loss-surgery The operation weight-loss-surgery Recovery weight-loss-surgery Lifestyle weight-loss-surgery Results weight-loss-surgery Risks Introduction  Weight loss surgery, also called bariatric surgery, is used to treat people who are dangerously obese. This type of surgery is only available on the NHS to treat people with potentially life-threatening obesity when other treatments, such as lifestyle changes, haven't worked. Potentially life-threatening obesity is defined as: having a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or above having a BMI of 35 or above and having another serious health condition that could be improved if you lose weight, such as type 2 diabetes or high blood pressure Adults who have recently been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes may also be considered for an assessment for weight loss surgery if they have a BMI of 30-34.9.  For people who meet the above criteria, weight loss surgery has proved to be effective in significantly and quickly reducing excess body fat.  However, it's always recommended that you try to lose weight through a healthy, calorie-controlled diet and increased amounts of exercise before you consider weight loss surgery, as surgery carries a risk of complications and requires a significant change in lifestyle afterwards. Because of these associated risks, most surgeons, whether they're working privately or for the NHS, would only consider someone for surgery if there was a clinical need, and not for cosmetic reasons. Read more about who can have weight loss surgery. Availability of weight loss surgery Even if you're eligible for weight loss surgery, the demand on the NHS is currently higher than supply in many areas of the country. Therefore, there may be a considerable waiting list. Weight loss surgery is also available privately. Prices are around:  £5,000-8,000 for gastric banding £9,500-15,000 for gastric bypass surgery An increasing number of people are seeking treatment abroad, as costs for private treatment are often cheaper in other countries, but this should be considered carefully. For more information, see planned treatment abroad. Types of weight loss surgery The three most widely used types of weight loss surgery are: gastric band \u2013 where a band is used to reduce the stomach's size, so a smaller amount of food is required to make you feel full gastric bypass \u2013 where your digestive system is re-routed past most of your stomach, so you digest less food and it takes much less to make you feel full sleeve gastrectomy \u2013 where some of the stomach is removed to reduce the amount of food that's required to make you feel full Several other surgical techniques may be recommended in certain circumstances. Read more about how weight loss surgery is performed. Life after weight loss surgery Weight loss surgery can achieve impressive results in terms of the amount of weight lost, but it shouldn't be seen as a magic cure for obesity. People who have had weight loss surgery need to stick to a rigorous and lifelong plan afterwards to avoid putting weight back on or long-term complications. This plan will include: a carefully controlled diet regular exercise The rapid weight loss may cause relationship problems \u2013 for example, with a partner who is also obese \u2013 and it may lead to unwanted loose folds of skin, which may need further surgery to correct. Many people with mental health problems, such as depression or anxiety, find that these problems do not automatically improve because they have lost weight. It's important to have realistic expectations about what life after weight loss surgery will be like. Read more about life after weight loss surgery. Risks As with all types of surgery, weight loss surgery carries the risk of complications, some of which are serious and potentially fatal, such as: internal bleeding a blood clot inside the leg (deep vein thrombosis) a blood clot or other blockage inside the lungs (pulmonary embolism) The overall risk of death in hospital after having any kind of weight loss surgery is around 1 in 1,000. Certain risk factors, such as high blood pressure or a BMI of 50 or above, also increase the risk of complications. Read more about the risks of weight loss surgery. Results As long as a person is willing and able to stick to their agreed plan afterwards, surgery can effectively reduce their weight and treat conditions associated with obesity, such as diabetes. Recent research carried out in America found that, on average: people with a gastric band will lose around half their excess body weight people with a gastric bypass will lose around two-thirds of their excess body weight Both techniques also lead to a considerable improvement (and sometimes a complete cure) of obesity-related conditions, such as diabetes or high blood pressure. Read more about the results of weight loss surgery. BMI and obesity The most widely used method of seeing if you're a healthy weight is to calculate your BMI. This is your weight in kilograms divided by your height in metres squared: If your BMI is 25-29.9, you're over the ideal weight for your height (overweight). If your BMI is 30-39.9, you're obese. If your BMI is over 40, you're very obese (known as morbidly obese). BMI doesn't provide an accurate assessment of weight in all circumstances, such as in people who are very muscular or children going through a sudden growth spurt. Page last reviewed: 26\/03\/2015 Next review due: 26\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 198 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 109  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Understanding BMI results in adults Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out how to calculate your body mass index (BMI) and interpret the results correctly. Media last reviewed: 20\/01\/2016 Next review due: 20\/01\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Obesity Healthy eating Emotional health Health and fitness Lose weight Understanding calories BMI healthy weight calculator External links NICE: obesity 'My gastric band surgery' Vicky talks about the changes she had to make to her diet before and after weight loss surgery, and what it's like living with a gastric band Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan 'Is weight loss surgery right for me?' Find out whether weight loss surgery, including gastric band and gastric bypass, is right for you, and how it would affect your diet and lifestyle NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Obsessive compulsive disorder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Obsessive-compulsive-disorder","content":"Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Real stories Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Clinical trials Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Community Obsessive compulsive disorder Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Symptoms Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Causes Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Diagnosis Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Treatment Introduction  Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is a mental health condition where a person has obsessive thoughts and compulsive activity. An obsession is an unwanted and unpleasant thought, image or urge that repeatedly enters a person's mind, causing feelings of anxiety, disgust or unease. A compulsion is a repetitive behaviour or mental act that someone feels they need to carry out to try to temporarily relieve the unpleasant feelings brought on by the obsessive thought. For example, someone with a fear of their house being burgled may feel they need to check all the windows and doors are locked several times before they can leave the house. OCD symptoms can range from mild to severe. Some people with OCD may spend an hour or so a day engaged in obsessive-compulsive thinking and behaviour, but for others the condition can completely take over their life. Read more about the symptoms of OCD. What causes OCD? It's not clear exactly what causes OCD, although a number of factors have been suggested. In some cases the condition may run in families, and may be linked to certain inherited genes that affect the brain's development. Brain imaging studies have shown the brains of some people with OCD can be different from the brains of people who do not have the condition. For example, there may be increased activity in certain areas of the brain, particularly those that deal with strong emotions and the responses to them. Studies have also shown people with OCD have an imbalance of serotonin in their brain. Serotonin is a chemical the brain uses to transmit information from one brain cell to another. Read more about the causes of OCD. Who is affected? It's estimated around 12 in every 1,000 people in the UK are affected by the condition. This equates to almost 750,000 people. OCD affects men, women and children. The condition typically first starts to significantly interfere with a person's life during early adulthood, although problems can develop at any age. Getting help People with OCD are often reluctant to seek help because they feel ashamed or embarrassed. However, if you have OCD, there is nothing to feel ashamed or embarrassed about. It is a long-term health condition like diabetes or asthma, and it is not your fault you have it. Seeking help is important because it is unlikely your symptoms will improve if left untreated, and they may get worse. You should visit your GP if you think you may have OCD. Initially, they will probably ask a number of questions about your symptoms and how they affect you. If your GP suspects OCD, you may need to be referred to a specialist for an assessment and appropriate treatment. Read more about diagnosing OCD. How OCD is treated With treatment, the outlook for OCD is good. Many people will eventually be cured of their OCD, or their symptoms will at least be reduced enough that they can enjoy a good quality of life. The main treatments for OCD are: cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) \u2013 involving a therapy known as graded exposure with response prevention (ERP), which encourages you to face your fear and let the obsessive thoughts occur without \"neutralising\" them with compulsions selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) \u2013 this medication can help reduce your symptoms by altering the balance of chemicals in your brain If these treatments aren't effective or your condition is particularly severe, you may need to be referred to a specialist mental health service for treatment. Read more about treating OCD. Obsessive compulsive disorder Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Diana Wilson talks about how OCD affected her, how she has dealt with it, and the support available to people with OCD. Media last reviewed: 19\/06\/2015 Next review due: 19\/06\/2017 Moodzone Feeling stressed, anxious or depressed? NHS Choices Moodzone can help you on your way to feeling better Page last reviewed: 27\/10\/2014 Next review due: 27\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 419 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 207  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cognitive behavioural therapy Depression Find mental health support Generalised anxiety disorder Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) External links Anxiety Care UK: OCD Mental Health Foundation: OCD Mind: understanding OCD Moodjuice: obsessions and compulsions National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: OCD OCD Action OCD-UK Time to change: real stories Online mental health treatments Flexible and effective NHS-approved treatments for depression, anxiety and more Moodzone: Anxiety control training Dr Chris Williams explains how you can take control of anxiety. This podcast is one of an eight-part series for Moodzone Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Obstructive sleep apnoea","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Sleep-apnoea","content":"Obstructive sleep apnoea - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Obstructive sleep apnoea  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Sleep-apnoea Real stories Sleep-apnoea Clinical trials Sleep-apnoea Community Obstructive sleep apnoea Sleep-apnoea Diagnosis Sleep-apnoea Treatment   Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is a relatively common condition where the walls of the throat relax and narrow during sleep, interrupting normal breathing. This may lead to regularly interrupted sleep, which can have a big impact on quality of life and increases the risk of developing certain conditions. This topic covers: Apnoea and hypopnoea Symptoms When to seek medical advice Causes Treatments Complications Prevention Apnoea and hypopnoea There are two types of breathing interruption characteristic of OSA: apnoea \u2013 where the muscles and soft tissues in the throat relax and collapse sufficiently to cause a total blockage of the airway; it's called an apnoea when the airflow is blocked for 10 seconds or more hypopnoea \u2013 a partial blockage of the airway that results in an airflow reduction of greater than 50% for 10 seconds or more People with OSA may experience repeated episodes of apnoea and hypopnoea throughout the night. These events may occur around once every one or two minutes in severe cases. As many people with OSA experience episodes of both apnoea and hypopnoea, doctors sometimes refer to the condition as obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea syndrome, or OSAHS. The term \"obstructive\" distinguishes OSA from rarer forms of sleep apnoea, such as central sleep apnoea, which is caused by the brain not sending signals to the breathing muscles during sleep. Symptoms of OSA The symptoms of OSA are often first spotted by a partner, friend or family member who notices problems while you sleep. Signs of OSA in someone sleeping can include: loud snoring noisy and laboured breathing repeated short periods where breathing is interrupted by gasping or snorting Some people with OSA may also experience night sweats and may wake up frequently during the night to urinate. During an episode, the lack of oxygen triggers your brain to pull you out of deep sleep \u2013 either to a lighter sleep or to wakefulness \u2013 so your airway reopens and you can breathe normally. These repeated sleep interruptions can make you feel very tired during the day. You'll usually have no memory of your interrupted breathing, so you may be unaware you have a problem. When to seek medical advice See your GP if you think you might have OSA. They can check for other possible reasons for your symptoms and can arrange for an assessment of your sleep to be carried out through a local sleep centre. As someone with OSA may not notice they have the condition, it often goes undiagnosed. Read more about diagnosing OSA. Causes of OSA It's normal for the muscles and soft tissues in the throat to relax and collapse to some degree while sleeping. For most people this doesn't cause breathing problems. In people with OSA the airway has narrowed as the result of a number of factors, including: being overweight \u2013 excessive body fat increases the bulk of soft tissue in the neck, which can place a strain on the throat muscles; excess stomach fat can also lead to breathing difficulties, which can make OSA worse being male \u2013 it's not known why OSA is more common in men than in women, but it may be related to different patterns of body fat distribution being 40 years of age or more \u2013 although OSA can occur at any age, it's more common in people who are over 40 having a large neck \u2013 men with a collar size greater than around 43cm (17 inches) have an increased risk of developing OSA taking medicines with a sedative effect \u2013 such as sleeping tablets or tranquillisers having an unusual inner neck structure \u2013 such as a narrow airway, large tonsils, adenoids or tongue, or a small lower jaw alcohol \u2013 drinking alcohol, particularly before going to sleep, can make snoring and sleep apnoea worse smoking \u2013 you're more likely to develop sleep apnoea if you smoke the menopause (in women) \u2013 the changes in hormone levels during the menopause may cause the throat muscles to relax more than usual having a family history of OSA \u2013 there may be genes inherited from your parents that can make you more susceptible to OSA nasal congestion \u2013 OSA occurs more often in people with nasal congestion, such as a deviated septum, where the tissue in the nose that divides the two nostrils is bent to one side, or nasal polyps, which may be a result of the airways being narrowed Treating OSA OSA is a treatable condition, and there are a variety of treatment options that can reduce the symptoms. Treatment options for OSA include: lifestyle changes \u2013 such as losing excess weight, cutting down on alcohol and sleeping on your side using a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device \u2013 these devices prevent your airway closing while you sleep by delivering a continuous supply of compressed air through a mask wearing a mandibular advancement device (MAD) \u2013 this gum shield-like device fits around your teeth, holding your jaw and tongue forward to increase the space at the back of your throat while you sleep Surgery may also be an option if OSA is thought to be the result of a physical problem that can be corrected surgically, such as an unusual inner neck structure. However, for most people surgery isn't appropriate and may only be considered as a last resort if other treatments haven't helped. Read more about treating OSA. Complications of OSA The treatments mentioned above can often help control the symptoms of OSA, although treatment will need to be lifelong in most cases. If OSA is left untreated, it can have a significant impact on your quality of life, causing problems such as poor performance at work and school, and placing a strain on your relationships with others. Poorly controlled OSA may also increase your risk of: developing high blood pressure (hypertension) having a stroke or heart attack developing an irregular heartbeat \u2013 such as atrial fibrillation developing type 2 diabetes \u2013 although it's unclear if this is the result of an underlying cause, such as obesity Research has shown someone who has been deprived of sleep because of OSA may be up to 12 times more likely to be involved in a car accident. If you're diagnosed with OSA, it may mean your ability to drive is affected. It's your legal obligation to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) about a medical condition that could have an impact on your driving ability. Once a diagnosis of OSA has been made, you shouldn't drive until your symptoms are well controlled. The GOV.UK website has advice about how to tell the DVLA about a medical condition. Preventing OSA It's not always possible to prevent OSA, but making certain lifestyle changes may reduce your risk of developing the condition. These include: losing weight if you're overweight or obese limiting how much alcohol you drink and avoiding alcohol in the evening stopping smoking if you smoke avoiding the use of sleeping tablets and tranquillisers Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/07\/2016 Next review due: 14\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 555 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 274  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 161  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Snoring and sleep apnoea Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An expert explains the difference between snoring and sleep apnoea, and people talk about the methods they've used to get a good night's sleep. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links High blood pressure Obesity Snoring Snoring advice Tiredness and fatigue External links British Lung Foundation: OSA British Society of Dental Sleep Medicine GOV.UK: driving and medical conditions Sleep Apnoea Trust Do you have sleep apnoea? Snoring can often be a symptom of a more serious sleeping disorder called sleep apnoea NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Occupational therapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/occupational-therapy","content":"Occupational therapy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Occupational therapy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview occupational-therapy Clinical trials Occupational therapy occupational-therapy When it is used occupational-therapy Techniques and equipment occupational-therapy Rehabilitation occupational-therapy Accessing occupational therapy Introduction  Occupational therapy provides support to people whose health prevents them doing the activities that matter to them. An occupational therapist can identify strengths and difficulties you may have in everyday life, such as dressing or getting to the shops, and will help you work out practical solutions. They can work with you to identify goals that can help you maintain, regain, or improve your independence by using different techniques, changing your environment, and using new equipment. Who can benefit from occupational therapy? Occupational therapy is used when someone is having difficulty with everyday tasks. This could be because they have a: medical condition \u2013 for example, rheumatoid arthritis learning disability mental health condition \u2013 for example, bipolar disorder Occupational therapists work with people of all ages and can look at all aspects of daily life, from the home to the school or workplace. Read more about when occupational therapy is used. Occupational therapy techniques After identifying the difficulties a person has with everyday tasks, occupational therapists can help by either: practising the activity in manageable stages teaching a different way to complete the activity recommending changes that will make the activity easier providing devices that make activities easier For example, after a hip replacement, someone may find it difficult to get in and out of the bath. Grab rails could be fitted in the bathroom to make this easier. Someone with rheumatoid arthritis \u2013 a condition that causes pain and swelling in the joints \u2013 may find it hard to lift small objects. Special equipment, such as a wide-handled vegetable peeler, may be made available to make tasks easier. Read more about occupational therapy techniques and equipment. The aim of these changes is to allow you to maintain and improve your ability to do everyday tasks. This can include both work and leisure activities. Read more about occupational therapy rehabilitation. How is it accessed? Ask your GP, nurse, or another health or social care professional for a referral to see an occupational therapist. You can also go through your local clinical commissioning group (CCG) or local authority social services department. If you do not want to go through the NHS or local authority, you can contact an occupational therapist directly. Read more about accessing occupational therapy. The professional body for occupational therapists working in a wide range of areas in the UK is the British Association of Occupational Therapy (BAOT). The association, which includes the College of Occupational Therapists (COT), has published several helpful patient information leaflets that explain how their work can help. Occupational therapy Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An occupational therapist explains what occupational therapy involves, who can benefit and the different types of help that are available. Media last reviewed: 18\/06\/2015 Next review due: 18\/06\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/08\/2014 Next review due: 23\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 151 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 68  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Care assessments Disability and social care Physiotherapy Practical support for carers Speech and language therapy video Stroke External links British Red Cross: support Disabled Living Foundation (DLF) Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) Rica: consumer research charity What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"OCD (obsessive compulsive disorder)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Obsessive-compulsive-disorder","content":"Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Real stories Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Clinical trials Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Community Obsessive compulsive disorder Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Symptoms Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Causes Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Diagnosis Obsessive-compulsive-disorder Treatment Introduction  Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is a mental health condition where a person has obsessive thoughts and compulsive activity. An obsession is an unwanted and unpleasant thought, image or urge that repeatedly enters a person's mind, causing feelings of anxiety, disgust or unease. A compulsion is a repetitive behaviour or mental act that someone feels they need to carry out to try to temporarily relieve the unpleasant feelings brought on by the obsessive thought. For example, someone with a fear of their house being burgled may feel they need to check all the windows and doors are locked several times before they can leave the house. OCD symptoms can range from mild to severe. Some people with OCD may spend an hour or so a day engaged in obsessive-compulsive thinking and behaviour, but for others the condition can completely take over their life. Read more about the symptoms of OCD. What causes OCD? It's not clear exactly what causes OCD, although a number of factors have been suggested. In some cases the condition may run in families, and may be linked to certain inherited genes that affect the brain's development. Brain imaging studies have shown the brains of some people with OCD can be different from the brains of people who do not have the condition. For example, there may be increased activity in certain areas of the brain, particularly those that deal with strong emotions and the responses to them. Studies have also shown people with OCD have an imbalance of serotonin in their brain. Serotonin is a chemical the brain uses to transmit information from one brain cell to another. Read more about the causes of OCD. Who is affected? It's estimated around 12 in every 1,000 people in the UK are affected by the condition. This equates to almost 750,000 people. OCD affects men, women and children. The condition typically first starts to significantly interfere with a person's life during early adulthood, although problems can develop at any age. Getting help People with OCD are often reluctant to seek help because they feel ashamed or embarrassed. However, if you have OCD, there is nothing to feel ashamed or embarrassed about. It is a long-term health condition like diabetes or asthma, and it is not your fault you have it. Seeking help is important because it is unlikely your symptoms will improve if left untreated, and they may get worse. You should visit your GP if you think you may have OCD. Initially, they will probably ask a number of questions about your symptoms and how they affect you. If your GP suspects OCD, you may need to be referred to a specialist for an assessment and appropriate treatment. Read more about diagnosing OCD. How OCD is treated With treatment, the outlook for OCD is good. Many people will eventually be cured of their OCD, or their symptoms will at least be reduced enough that they can enjoy a good quality of life. The main treatments for OCD are: cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) \u2013 involving a therapy known as graded exposure with response prevention (ERP), which encourages you to face your fear and let the obsessive thoughts occur without \"neutralising\" them with compulsions selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) \u2013 this medication can help reduce your symptoms by altering the balance of chemicals in your brain If these treatments aren't effective or your condition is particularly severe, you may need to be referred to a specialist mental health service for treatment. Read more about treating OCD. Obsessive compulsive disorder Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Diana Wilson talks about how OCD affected her, how she has dealt with it, and the support available to people with OCD. Media last reviewed: 19\/06\/2015 Next review due: 19\/06\/2017 Moodzone Feeling stressed, anxious or depressed? NHS Choices Moodzone can help you on your way to feeling better Page last reviewed: 27\/10\/2014 Next review due: 27\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 419 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 207  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cognitive behavioural therapy Depression Find mental health support Generalised anxiety disorder Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) External links Anxiety Care UK: OCD Mental Health Foundation: OCD Mind: understanding OCD Moodjuice: obsessions and compulsions National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: OCD OCD Action OCD-UK Time to change: real stories Online mental health treatments Flexible and effective NHS-approved treatments for depression, anxiety and more Moodzone: Anxiety control training Dr Chris Williams explains how you can take control of anxiety. This podcast is one of an eight-part series for Moodzone Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ocular cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-eye","content":"Eye cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Eye cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cancer-of-the-eye Clinical trials Eye cancer Introduction  Between 500 and 600 cases of eye cancer (ocular cancer) are diagnosed in the UK each year. There are a number of different types of cancer that affect the eyes, including: eye melanoma squamous cell carcinoma lymphoma retinoblastoma \u2013 a childhood cancer Cancer can also sometimes develop in the tissues surrounding your eyeball or spread to the eye from other parts of the body, such as the lungs or breasts. This topic focuses on melanoma of the eye, one of the most common types of eye cancer. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the other types of eye cancer. This page covers: Symptoms of eye cancer About melanoma of the eye What causes eye melanoma? Diagnosing melanoma of the eye Treatments for eye melanoma Outlook for eye melanoma Symptoms of eye cancer Eye cancer doesn't always cause obvious symptoms and may only be picked up during a routine eye test. Symptoms of eye cancer can include: shadows, flashes of light, or wiggly lines in your vision blurred vision a dark patch in your eye that's getting bigger partial or total loss of vision bulging of one eye a lump on your eyelid or in your eye that's increasing in size pain in or around your eye, although this is rare These symptoms can also be caused by more minor eye conditions, so they're not necessarily a sign of cancer. However, it's important to get the symptoms checked by a doctor as soon as possible. Melanoma of the eye Melanoma is cancer that develops from pigment-producing cells called melanocytes. Most melanomas develop in the skin, but it's also possible for them to occur in other parts of the body, including the eye. Eye melanoma most commonly affects the eyeball. Doctors sometimes call it uveal or choroidal melanoma, depending on exactly which part of your eye is affected. It can also affect the conjunctiva, the thin layer that covers the front of the eye, or the eyelid. What causes eye melanoma? Eye melanoma occurs when the pigment-producing cells in the eyes divide and multiply too rapidly. This produces a lump of tissue known as a tumour. It's not clear exactly why this occurs, but the following factors may increase the risk of it happening: lighter eye colour \u2013 if you have blue, grey or green eyes, you have a higher risk of developing eye melanoma compared with people who have brown eyes white or pale skin \u2013 eye melanoma mostly affects white people and is more common in those with fair skin unusual moles \u2013 if you have irregularly shaped or unusually coloured moles, you're more at risk of developing skin cancer and eye melanoma use of sunbeds \u2013 there's some evidence to suggest that exposing yourself to ultraviolet (UV) radiation from sunbeds, for example, can increase your risk of eye melanoma overexposure to sunlight \u2013 this increases your risk of skin cancer, and may also be a risk factor for eye melanoma The risk of developing eye melanoma also increases with age, with most cases being diagnosed in people in their 50s. Read about the risk factors for other types of eye cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. Diagnosing melanoma of the eye If your GP or optician (optometrist) suspects you have a serious problem with your eyes, they will refer you to a specialist eye doctor called an ophthalmologist for an assessment. If they suspect you have melanoma of the eye, they'll refer you to a specialist centre for eye cancer. There are four centres in the UK, located in London, Sheffield, Liverpool, and Glasgow. It's likely you'll have a number of different tests at the centre, including: an eye examination \u2013 to look at the structures of your eyes in more detail and check for abnormalities an ultrasound scan of your eye \u2013 a small probe placed over your closed eye uses high-frequency sound waves to create an image of the inside of your eye; this allows your doctor to find out more about the position of the tumour and its size a fluorescein angiogram \u2013 where photographs of the suspected cancer are taken using a special camera after dye has been injected into your bloodstream to highlight the tumour Occasionally, a thin needle may be used to remove a small sample of cells from the tumour (biopsy). The genetic information in these cells is analysed to give an indication of the chances of the cancer spreading or coming back. Treatments for eye melanoma Treatment for melanoma of the eye depends on the size and location of the tumour. Your care team will explain each treatment option in detail, including the benefits and any potential complications. Treatment will aim to conserve the affected eye whenever possible. The main treatments for eye melanoma are: brachytherapy \u2013 tiny plates lined with radioactive material called plaques are inserted near the tumour and left in place for up to a week to kill the cancerous cells external radiotherapy \u2013 a machine is used to carefully aim beams of radiation at the tumour to kill the cancerous cells surgery to remove the tumour or part of the eye \u2013 this may be possible if the tumour is small and you still have some vision in your eye removal of the eye (enucleation) \u2013 this may be necessary if the tumour is large or you've lost your vision; the eye will eventually be replaced with an artificial eye that matches your other eye Chemotherapy is rarely used for eye melanoma, but may be suitable for other types of eye cancer. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the treatment options for eye cancer and the types of eye cancer surgery. Outlook for eye melanoma The outlook for melanoma of the eye depends on how big the cancer is at the time it's diagnosed and exactly which parts of the eye are affected. Overall: about 8 out of every 10 people (80%) diagnosed with a small eye melanoma will live for at least five years after diagnosis about 7 out of every 10 people (70%) diagnosed with a medium-sized eye melanoma will live for at least five years after diagnosis about 5 out of every 10 people (50%) diagnosed with a large eye melanoma will live for at least five years after diagnosis The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the stages of eye cancer and statistics and outlook for eye cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/03\/2016 Next review due: 02\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 49 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coping with a cancer diagnosis Living with cancer Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: eye cancer Macmillan: ocular melanoma Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Radiotherapy Radiotherapy uses controlled doses of high-energy radiation to destroy cancer cells NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ocular migraine","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/retinal-migraine","content":"Retinal migraine - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Retinal migraine  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Retinal migraine   Retinal migraine (ocular migraine) is an eye condition that causes brief attacks of blindness or visual problems like flashing lights in one eye.  These episodes can be frightening, but in most cases they're harmless and shortlived, and eyesight goes back to normal afterwards. Some people get retinal migraine every few months, although the frequency can vary. Retinal migraine is a separate condition and shouldn't be confused with headache-type migraine or migraine with aura, which usually affects the vision of both eyes. Symptoms of retinal migraine The symptoms of retinal migraine may include: partial or total loss of vision in one eye \u2013 this usually lasts 10 to 20 minutes before vision gradually returns headache \u2013 this may happen before, during or after the vision attack It's unusual for an episode of vision loss to last longer than an hour. The same eye is affected every time in almost all cases. Vision may slowly become blurred or dimmed, or there may be flashes of light. Some people see a mosaic-like pattern of blank spots (scotomas), which enlarge to cause total loss of vision. When to seek medical advice If your eyesight suddenly deteriorates, make an emergency appointment to see an optician trained to recognise eye abnormalities and signs of eye disease (optometrist), your GP, or call NHS 111. Use our directory to find opticians or find GP services. It's important to see an optometrist or medical doctor urgently if you suddenly lose your eyesight, particularly if it occurs for the first time. There are other more serious causes of sight loss that doctors will want to rule out. Diagnosing retinal migraine If you manage to see a GP or optometrist during an attack, they may be able to see the decreased bloodflow to your eye using an instrument called an ophthalmoscope. In this case the GP or optometrist may be able to make a confident diagnosis of retinal migraine. However, as attacks are usually brief it's more likely you'll be diagnosed based on an account of your symptoms. You may be referred to an eye specialist for tests to rule out other more serious eye diseases or stroke. Causes of retinal migraine Retinal migraine is caused by the blood vessels to the eye suddenly narrowing (constricting), reducing the bloodflow to the eye. It may be triggered by: stress smoking high blood pressure  hormonal birth control pills exercise bending over high altitude dehydration low blood sugar excessive heat Afterwards the blood vessels relax, bloodflow resumes and sight returns. Usually there are no abnormalities within the eye and permanent damage to the eye is rare. Retinal migraine tends to be more common in: women people aged under 40 people with a personal or family history of migraines or other headaches people with an underlying disease \u2013 such as lupus, hardening of the arteries, sickle cell disease, epilepsy, antiphospholipid syndrome, and giant cell arteritis Treatment for retinal migraine Treatment for retinal migraine usually just involves taking pain relief for any headaches and reducing exposure to anything that might be triggering the retinal migraine. Your doctor may sometimes prescribe medication, such as: aspirin \u2013 to reduce pain and inflammation a beta-blocker \u2013 which may help relax blood vessels a calcium channel blocker \u2013 which may help prevent blood vessels constricting a tricyclic antidepressant \u2013 which may help prevent migraine anti-epileptics \u2013 which may help prevent migraine However, there's still a lack of research about the best way to treat or prevent a retinal migraine. Possible complications of retinal migraine There's a small risk that the reduced bloodflow may damage the thin layer at the back of the eye (the retina) and the blood vessels of the eye. This will be monitored in your follow-up appointments. Permanent vision loss is rare. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/07\/2016 Next review due: 26\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 405 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 230  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 113  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Migraine Find optician services External links PubMed Central: retinal migraine case study Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Odour, imaginary","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/phantosmia","content":"Phantosmia (smelling odours that aren't there) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Phantosmia (smelling odours that aren't there)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phantosmia Introduction  'Phantosmia' is the medical term for an imaginary odour (phantom smell). It is also known as an \"olfactory hallucination\". The smell is unique to the person and is usually unpleasant, spoiling the taste of any food or drink consumed.It can be in one or both nostrils. Most phantom smells go away in time and are not caused by anything serious. But if the problem persists and you're worried, see your GP. How does your sense of smell work? When something gives off a smell, it means tiny molecules have evaporated from its surface and reached your nose. High up inside your nose is tissue containing specialised nerve cells, called olfactory sensory neurons, which connect directly to your brain. These nerve cells have receptors that detect the microscopic odour molecules and send electrical signals to the brain. The brain receives these signals and identifies the smell. There are two ways smells can reach the olfactory sensory neurons: By the 'front door' through the nostrils. By the 'back door' through the throat to the back of the nasal cavity. Chewing food releases odour molecules and when you swallow, the tongue pushes this air into the back of the nasal cavity (this is known as \"retro-nasal olfaction\"). What could cause phantom smells? There are a wide range of possible causes of phantosmia, which include: nasal infection \u2013 some people start to perceive a smell after they develop an infection that affects their nose or sinuses (read about sinusitis). The smell may become noticeable after a sudden change in airflow through their nose \u2013 for example, just after they've sneezed. It usually goes away when the infection clears nasal polyps, which are abnormal tissue growths that form inside the nasal passages and sinuses (read more about nasal polyps) migraine with aura \u2013 some people smell phantom odours just before or during a migraine (read more about migraines) dental problems smoking exposure to certain chemicals such as insecticides or solvents radiation for treatment of head and neck cancer Neurological (nervous system) conditions Less commonly, the cause of phantosmia is either nerve cells sending abnormal smell signals to the brain, or a problem with the brain itself. This may be the result of: a disease affecting the nervous system, such as epilepsy, Parkinson\u2019s disease or Alzheimer\u2019s disease a stroke a head injury cancer \u2013 usually a brain tumour or neuroblastoma (a rare cancer that may start in the olfactory nerve) The above links will take you to more information on these conditions.  How is it diagnosed? Your GP will want to know if the problem is definitely with your sense of smell, and not with your sense of taste (it's easy to confuse these). They will also want to determine whether the smell is perceived, as in phantosmia, or actually real \u2013 you might be giving off and detecting a body odour, for example. You'll have a head and neck examination, to see if there is any obvious problem such as something in your nasal passages. The GP will want to know if the smell transmits through one nostril or both. You may be referred to an ear, nose and throat specialist for further tests, which may include: a nasal endoscopy, where a fine, flexible tube with a tiny camera at the end is inserted up through your nose and images are viewed on a television screen (read more about an endoscopy) an MRI scan or CT scan of your brain and nasal cavities, to rule out tumours, infections or obstructions How is phantosmia treated? Some people with phantosmia will find that the smell gradually fades over a few months, and no treatment is needed. If it is caused by an illness such as sinusitis, it should go when you recover from the illness. Otherwise, if it persists, the following treatments may be tried: Rinsing out the nasal passages with saline solution, which may provide temporary relief for short periods of time. This may temporarily block the smell signals going to your brain, but you'll need to keep doing it. Nasal drops or spray \u2013 you may be prescribed oxymetazoline, which narrows blood vessels in the nose to help reduce nasal congestion, a spray containing an anaesthetic, which numbs the nerve cells, or a nasal steroid spray. Sedatives, antidepressants or anti-epileptic drugs, which may work for some people. You must always weigh up the benefits of these treatments with the possible side effects \u2013 speak to your doctor about this. Other smell disorders Parosmia is a distorted perception of smell to an odour that is in your environment \u2013 for example, a piece of fruit may smell like rotting flesh. Anosmia is complete loss of the sense of smell. Read more about anosmia. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/10\/2014 Next review due: 27\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 165 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Nasal polyps Anosmia (loss of smell) Anosmia (loss of sense of smell) Anosmia is usually caused by a nasal condition or brain injury, although an estimated 6,000 people in the UK are born with it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oedema","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Oedema","content":"Oedema - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oedema  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Oedema Clinical trials Oedema   Oedema is a build up of fluid in the body which causes the affected tissue to become swollen. The swelling can occur in one particular part of the body or may be more general, depending on the cause. Fluid can accumulate under the skin \u2013 most commonly causing swelling of the lower legs and ankles \u2013 or in one of the body's internal organs, such as the lungs. As well as swelling or puffiness of the skin, oedema can also cause: skin discolouration areas of skin that temporarily hold the imprint of your finger when pressed (known as pitting oedema) aching, tender limbs stiff joints weight gain Types of oedema Oedema is most common in the feet and ankles. This is known as peripheral oedema. Other types of oedema include: cerebral oedema \u2013 affecting the brain pulmonary oedema \u2013 affecting the lungs macular oedema \u2013 affecting the eyes Idiopathic oedema is a term used to describe cases of oedema where a cause can't be found. Causes of oedema It's normal to have some swelling in your legs at the end of the day, particularly if you've been sitting or standing for long periods. Oedema is often a symptom of an underlying health condition. It can occur as a result of the following conditions or treatments: pregnancy kidney disease  heart failure  chronic lung disease  thyroid disease liver disease   malnutrition medication, such as corticosteroids or medicine for high blood pressure (hypertension) the contraceptive pill Immobility and standing for long periods are the two most common causes of oedema in the legs. Other possible causes include: a blood clot severe varicose veins a leg injury or leg surgery burns to the skin Treating oedema Oedema is often temporary and clears up by itself. For example, if you've been standing up for too long on a hot day, your ankles may swell up until you get the chance to put your feet up and rest. If oedema doesn't go away by itself, see your GP. They'll try and find out if there's an underlying cause which needs to be treated. This could involve taking medication or following some advice, such as: losing weight (if you're overweight) taking regular exercise, such as walking, swimming or cycling raising your legs three to four times a day to improve your circulation avoiding standing for long periods of time If an underlying condition is causing the fluid imbalance, it should clear up after the condition has been diagnosed and treated. Lymphoedema Lymphoedema is swelling in the legs caused by a blockage in the lymphatic system, or an inherited condition. The lymphatic system consists of a series of lymph nodes (glands) connected by a network of vessels (lymphatics), similar to blood vessels. Fluid surrounding body tissues usually drains into nearby lymph vessels so it can be transported back into the blood. However, if the lymph vessels are blocked, the fluid can't be reabsorbed and will build up in the tissue. Unlike oedema, lymphoedema is a long-term condition that can cause discomfort, pain and a loss of mobility. It can't be cured, but it can be controlled using a number of treatments, including: compression stockings skin care lymphatic massage elevation Read more about lymphoedema. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 25\/07\/2016 Next review due: 25\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1594 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 639  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 505  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 234  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Heart failure High blood pressure Kidney disease Lymphoedema Overweight and pregnant External links Lymphoedema Support Network Swollen ankles in pregnancy The causes of swollen ankles, feet and fingers in pregnancy, and when you need to see a doctor Is your blood pressure too high? At least 25% of adults have high blood pressure. Get tips on how to keep healthy Kidney health Find out about how to look after your kidneys and whether you need to have them checked Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oesophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/oesophageal-atresia","content":"Oesphageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistula - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oesophageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistula  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview oesophageal-atresia Clinical trials Oesophageal atresia Introduction  Oesophageal atresia is a rare birth defect that affects a baby's oesophagus (the tube through which food passes from the mouth to the stomach). The upper part of the oesophagus doesn't connect with the lower oesophagus and stomach. It usually ends in a pouch, which means food cannot reach the stomach.  It often happens along with another birth defect called a tracheo-oesophageal fistula, which is a connection between the lower part of the oesophagus and the windpipe (trachea). This causes air to pass from the windpipe to the oesophagus and stomach, and stomach acid to pass into the lungs. These defects mean the baby won't be able to swallow safely, if at all. They could also develop life-threatening problems such as choking and pneumonia if not treated quickly, so surgery will usually be carried out within a few days of birth. Causes of oesophageal atresia Oesophageal atresia is thought to be caused by a problem with the development of the oesophagus while the baby is in the womb, although it's not clear exactly why this happens. The condition is more common in babies of mothers who had too much amniotic fluid in pregnancy (polyhydramnios). It's also more common in babies who have problems with the development of their kidneys, heart and spine. The risk of having another baby with oesophageal atresia is thought to be very small. Diagnosing oesophageal atresia Doctors may suspect your baby has oesophageal atresia before they're born if routine ultrasound scans show a lot of amniotic fluid in the womb, although this can have a number of causes. Tests to check for the condition will be carried out after your baby is born, if they seem to be having problems swallowing or breathing. A thin feeding tube may be passed down your baby's throat via their nose, to see if it reaches their stomach, and an X-ray may be carried out to check the oesophagus. Repairing the defects An operation to repair an oesophageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistula is usually done soon after birth. Your baby will be taken to the neonatal intensive care unit, where they're given a general anaesthetic. They will receive nutrition into a vein (intravenously) and a suction tube is used to remove fluid from the pouch in their oesophagus. The surgeon makes a cut on the right side of the chest, between the ribs, and closes off the abnormal connection (fistula) between the oesophagus and windpipe. The surgeon will then sew together the upper and lower parts of the oesophagus. If the gap in the oesophagus is large, your child may need to wait a few months for the operation, to allow their oesophagus to grow a bit more. In this case, they'll need to have a feeding tube temporarily placed into their stomach through their tummy. Occasionally, a procedure to lengthen the oesophagus before repairing it may be carried out. After surgery After surgery, your child will be kept in the intensive care unit and placed in an incubator. They may also need: antibiotics a machine to help them breathe (ventilator) a tube into their chest to drain fluids or air that might be trapped oxygen pain medication Your baby will be given nutrition intravenously at first, but you should be able to feed them after a few days using a feeding tube passed into their stomach through their nose. Going home You'll be able to take your baby home once they're taking food by mouth. This will usually take a week or two. You'll be advised about how to feed your child when they get home and as they get older. Breast or bottle feeding will usually be recommended for at least the first few months. It may then be possible to very gradually wean your child onto thicker foods. The hospital may be able to refer you to a dietitian for specific advice. Contact the hospital or your GP if your child is choking or coughing on their feeds, has any difficulty swallowing or is failing to gain weight. Risks of surgery With any surgery, there is a small risk of bleeding and infection. For this particular operation, the additional risks are: food or air leaking from the area being repaired narrowing of the repaired oesophagus re-opening of the fistula between the oesophagus and windpipe A further procedure or operation may need to be carried out to treat these problems if they develop. Outlook Most children who have had surgery to repair oesophageal atresia and\/or tracheo-oesophageal fistula will go on to have normal lives. However, there's a chance your child may experience some further problems, including: dysphagia (swallowing difficulties) gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) \u2013 where acid leaks out of the stomach and up into the oesophagus asthma-like symptoms \u2013 such as persistent coughing or wheezing recurrent chest infections tracheomalacia \u2013 where the repaired section of windpipe becomes floppy and makes breathing difficult Your child will be continuously monitored by specialists after their operation to pick up problems such as these and treat them early on. Some of these problems will improve as your child gets older. Information about your child If your child had oesophageal atresia as a baby, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists to better understand the condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/06\/2015 Next review due: 02\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 23 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Difficulty swallowing Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) External links Tracheo-Oesophageal Fistula Support (TOFS) Reflux in babies Babies often bring up milk during or shortly after feeding. This is known as \"posseting\", or \"reflux\" NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oesophageal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-oesophagus","content":"Oesophageal cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oesophageal cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Real stories Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Community Oesophageal cancer Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Symptoms Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Causes Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Treatment Cancer-of-the-oesophagus Living with   Oesophageal cancer is a type of cancer affecting the oesophagus (gullet) \u2013 the long tube that carries food from the throat to the stomach. It mainly affects people in their 60s and 70s and is more common in men than women. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Causes Treatments Outlook Symptoms of oesophageal cancer Oesophageal cancer doesn't usually cause any symptoms in the early stages when the tumour is small. It's only when it gets bigger that symptoms tend to develop. Symptoms of oesophageal cancer can include: difficulty swallowing persistent indigestion or heartburn bringing up food soon after eating loss of appetite and weight loss pain or discomfort in your upper tummy, chest or back Read more about the symptoms of oesophageal cancer. When to get medical advice See your GP if you experience: swallowing difficulties heartburn on most days for three weeks or more any other unusual or persistent symptoms The symptoms can be caused by several conditions and in many cases won't be caused by cancer \u2013 but it's a good idea to get them checked out. If your GP thinks you need to have some tests, they can refer you to a hospital specialist. Read about how oesophageal cancer is diagnosed. Causes of oesophageal cancer The exact cause of oesophageal cancer is unknown, but the following things can increase your risk: persistent gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) smoking drinking too much alcohol over a long period of time being overweight or obese having an unhealthy diet that's low in fruit and vegetables Stopping smoking, cutting down on alcohol, losing weight and having a healthy diet may help reduce your risk of developing oesophageal cancer. Read more about the causes of oesophageal cancer. Treatments for oesophageal cancer If oesophageal cancer is diagnosed at an early stage, it may be possible to cure it with: surgery to remove the affected section of oesophagus chemotherapy, with or without radiotherapy (chemoradiation), to kill the cancerous cells and shrink the tumour If oesophageal cancer is diagnosed at a later stage, a cure may not be achievable. But in these cases, surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy can be used to help keep the cancer under control and relieve any symptoms you have. Read more about how oesophageal cancer is treated and living with oesophageal cancer. Outlook for oesophageal cancer The outlook for oesophageal cancer varies depending on things such as how far it has spread, your age and your general health. If it's detected while it's still quite small, it may be possible to get rid of it completely. But as oesophageal cancer doesn't usually cause any symptoms until a late stage, it has often spread quite far by the time it's diagnosed. Cancer Research UK has more information about oesophageal cancer survival statistics. Page last reviewed: 04\/07\/2016 Next review due: 04\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 399 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 181  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Swallowing problems Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Care and support guide Find cancer information and support External links Cancer Research UK: oesophageal cancer Macmillan: oesophageal cancer Barrett's Oesophagus Campaign My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oligomenorrhoea","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Periods-irregular","content":"Irregular periods - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Irregular periods  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Periods-irregular Clinical trials Irregular periods Periods-irregular Causes Periods-irregular Treatment Introduction  Some women find their menstrual cycle isn't always regular. Their periods may be early or late, and may vary in how long they last or how heavy they are each time. Your normal menstrual cycle can be disturbed if you change your method of contraception, or if you have an imbalance of the reproductive hormones oestrogen and progesterone. Many factors can cause a hormone imbalance, from polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) to extreme weight loss and excessive exercise. Read more about the causes of irregular periods. Treating irregular periods Treatment for irregular periods may not always be necessary. However, you should see your GP if: you have bleeding or spotting between periods or after sex you have very heavy periods, where you need to change your tampon or pad every hour or two, or you have to wear both a pad and a tampon you experience heavy bleeding that floods into your bed or through your clothes  your periods last longer than seven days your periods are more frequent than once a month You may need a different contraceptive, or further investigations may be needed to find out whether you have an underlying health condition. Read more about treating irregular periods. The average menstrual cycle On average, a woman's menstrual cycle lasts 28 days, but cycles can vary from 24 to 35 days. After puberty, most women develop a regular menstrual cycle, with around the same length of time between periods. Menstrual bleeding usually lasts two to seven days, with the average being five days. Periods and period problems Read more about: periods (including an explanation of the menstrual cycle) heavy periods absent periods painful periods Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/04\/2015 Next review due: 26\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 226 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Menstrual cycle: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how the menstrual cycle works. Media last reviewed: 21\/02\/2015 Next review due: 21\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Absent periods Heavy periods Intrauterine device (IUD) Painful periods Periods Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Teen girls' health External links FPA: help and advice Lab Tests Online UK: FSH test Women's Health Concern: questions about periods Are your periods healthy? The signs that need a check-up, including bleeding after sex, between periods and after the menopause Are you worried about fertility? If you\u2019re a woman trying for a child and are worried you might be having problems, take this test. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oligozoospermia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/low-sperm-count","content":"Low sperm count - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Low sperm count  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Low sperm count   A low sperm count, also called oligozoospermia, is where a man has fewer than 15 million sperm per millilitre of semen. Having a low sperm count can make it more difficult to conceive naturally, although successful pregnancies can still occur. Problems with sperm, including a low sperm count and problems with sperm quality, are quite common. They're a factor in around one in three couples who are struggling to get pregnant. There are treatments available on the NHS or privately that can help you become a dad if you have a low sperm count. This page covers: Getting tested Home-testing kits Causes Treatments Getting your sperm count checked See your GP if you have not managed to conceive after one year of trying for a baby. It's a good idea for both you and your partner to get advice, as fertility problems can affect men and women and often it's a combination of both. It's important to understand what the exact issue is before you decide on your next steps. One of the tests your GP can arrange is a semen analysis. This is where a sample of your semen is analysed in a laboratory to check the quality and quantity of the sperm. The results are usually available within a week. If the results are abnormal, the test should be repeated to ensure it was accurate. This will normally be performed after three months. Your GP can refer you to a specialist in male infertility at your local hospital or fertility clinic if any problems are found. Home sperm count testing kits There are several male fertility home-testing kits available to buy from pharmacies. These tests claim to indicate whether your sperm count is low. It may be tempting to try one of the tests if you would rather not see your GP, but you should be aware that: although research by the manufacturers suggests these tests can give an accurate indication of sperm count, they haven't been extensively studied some home-testing kits classify a low sperm count as under 20 million sperm per millilitre of semen, but more recent international guidelines state that anything above 15 million sperm per millilitre of semen is normal home-testing kits only check the number of sperm, not other things that can affect fertility, such as how well the sperm are able to move (motility) While these tests might sometimes give a useful indication of your sperm count, they may also give you false reassurance or may suggest your sperm count is low when it's actually perfectly normal. It's better to see your GP for a proper semen analysis at an accredited laboratory if you're concerned about your fertility. See how to use self-test kits safely for more about the issues of home-testing. Causes of a low sperm count In many cases, it's not obvious what causes a low sperm count. Sometimes problems with sperm count and quality are associated with: a hormone imbalance, such as hypogonadism (reduced hormone production) a genetic problem such as Klinefelter syndrome having had undescended testicles as a baby a structural problem \u2013 for example, the tubes that carry sperm being damaged and blocked by illness or injury, or being absent from birth a genital infection such as chlamydia, gonorrhoea or prostatitis (infection of the prostate gland) varicoceles (enlarged veins in the testicles) previous surgery to the testicles or hernia repairs  the testicles becoming overheated excessive alcohol consumption, smoking and using drugs such as marijuana or cocaine certain medications, including testosterone replacement therapy, long-term anabolic steroid use, cancer medications (chemotherapy), some antibiotics and some antidepressants Treatments for low sperm count If you or your partner has been diagnosed with a low sperm count, there are several options available. Keep trying Your doctor may initially suggest trying to conceive naturally for a little longer. Many couples conceive within the second year of trying. You can help maximise your chances of conceiving by: having sex every two or three days moderating your alcohol consumption and stopping smoking staying in good shape, exercising regularly and having a healthy, balanced diet Read more about how to improve your chances of becoming a dad. IVF In vitro fertilisation (IVF) may be an option if you have a slightly low sperm count and you've been trying to conceive naturally with your partner for at least two years. During IVF, an egg is removed from the woman's ovaries and fertilised with sperm in a laboratory. The fertilised egg is then returned to the woman's womb to grow and develop. Read more about IVF. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) is a type of IVF technique, in which a single sperm is injected directly into an egg to fertilise it. The fertilised egg is then transferred to the woman's womb. ICSI may be offered if you've been trying to conceive naturally with your partner for at least two years and you have either: few or no sperm in your semen poor quality sperm Before having ICSI, you and your partner will need to have an assessment to ensure the treatment is appropriate. This will involve questions about your medical and sexual history, and screening tests to check for infections or genetic problems that could affect your baby and the chances of ICSI working. The Human Fertilisation & Embryo Authority (HFEA) has more information about ICSI. Donor insemination Donor insemination means using sperm donated by another man. You may wish to consider using donor insemination as an alternative to ICSI, particularly if the man has a genetic disorder that could be passed on to any children. It can be used as part of IVF if necessary. If you're considering donor insemination, you should be offered counselling as a couple about the implications for you and your children. Read more about what you need to know about using a sperm donor. Gonadotrophin medication If you have very low levels of gonadotrophin hormones (which stimulate the production of sperm), you should be offered treatment with gonadotrophin medication to improve your fertility. But if no cause has been found for your abnormal sperm count, you will not be offered hormone-based medicines as they are not known to improve fertility in these cases. Page last reviewed: 02\/08\/2016 Next review due: 02\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 107 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Fertility advice IVF Using a sperm donor: what you need to know Infertility External links Infertility Network UK Support if you have fertility problems Fertility problems can leave you emotionally drained. Find out how to get support Is IVF right for you? Considering IVF? Find out if IVF gives you the best chance of getting pregnant, and how to get IVF on the NHS NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"OME (otitis media with effusion)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/glue-ear","content":"Glue ear - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Glue ear  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Glue-ear Clinical trials Glue ear Glue-ear Symptoms Glue-ear Causes Glue-ear Diagnosis Glue-ear Treatment Glue-ear Complications Glue-ear Prevention Introduction  Glue ear is a common childhood condition where the middle ear becomes filled with fluid. The medical term for glue ear is otitis media with effusion (OME). It's estimated that one in five children around the age of two will be affected by glue ear at any given time, and about 8 in every 10 children will have had glue ear at least once by the time they're 10 years old. The main symptom of glue ear is some hearing loss in one or both ears. This is usually similar to what you experience when you put your hands over your ears. Signs that your child may be having problems hearing include:  struggling to keep up with conversations becoming aggravated because they're trying harder to hear regularly turning up the volume on the television  Contact your GP if you have any concerns about your child's hearing. Read more about the symptoms of glue ear and diagnosing glue ear. What causes glue ear? The middle ear is the part of the ear directly behind the eardrum. It contains three tiny bones that carry sound vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear. The build-up of fluid associated with glue ear prevents these bones moving freely, which affects hearing because it means they can't pass sound vibrations to the inner ear. Exactly what causes this build-up of fluid is unclear, although it seems to be related to a problem with the tube that connects the middle ear to the back of the throat (Eustachian tube). One of the main functions of the Eustachian tube is to help drain fluid from the middle ear. It's thought that problems with the Eustachian tube may be caused by things like a previous ear infection, smoke irritation or allergies. Glue ear isn't caused by a build-up of ear wax, or by getting water in the ear after swimming or showering. Other factors that are also thought to increase the risk of getting glue ear include: growing up in a household where adults smoke being bottlefed rather than breastfed as a baby having siblings (brothers and sisters) who've had the condition Read more about the causes of glue ear and preventing glue ear. Treating glue ear Most cases of glue ear don't require treatment as the condition will improve by itself, usually within three months. Treatment is usually only recommended when symptoms last longer than three months and the hearing loss is thought to be significant enough to interfere with a child's speech and language development. In these circumstances, glue ear can usually be treated using minor surgery, which involves placing small tubes (grommets) in the ear to help drain away the fluid. Read more about treating glue ear. Complications of glue ear Possible complications of glue ear include ear infections and, where hearing loss is more severe, a minor temporary delay in speech and language development. Some of the problems associated with glue ear get better by themselves quite quickly, although further treatment may occasionally be necessary. Read more about the complications of glue ear. Adults with glue ear Glue ear can occasionally develop in adults. It's diagnosed and treated in much the same way as children. If symptoms show no signs of improving after about three months, grommets can be put inside the ear to drain the fluid from it. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 04\/06\/2015 Next review due: 04\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 439 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 271  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Glue ear: an animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail what glue ear is, what causes it and how it's treated. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Hearing loss Hearing tests Middle ear infection Perforated eardrum External links National Deaf Children's Society: glue ear NICE: surgical management of glue ear in children Kids: coughs, colds and ear infections What to do when your child has a minor illness such as a cough, cold, sore throat or ear infection Earache Earache can be worrying, but it's usually only caused by a minor infection and will often get better in a few days without treatment Does your child have a serious illness? Learn the warning signs that your baby or toddler may be seriously ill NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Onychogryphosis (overgrown nails)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nail-abnormalities","content":"Nail abnormalities - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nail abnormalities  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Fingernail or toenail abnormalities can tell you a lot about your health. They're often a sign of a fungal nail infection or injury, but can sometimes indicate a more serious underlying disease. Visit your GP if your nails have changed in colour, texture, shape or thickness and you don't know why (you haven't injured your nails or been biting them). This guide gives the most likely reasons for the following nail problems: brittle or crumbly nails  discoloured nails  white nails  thickened, overgrown nails  loose nails  indented spoon-shaped nails  pitting or dents on the nails  grooves going across the width of the nails  unusually curved fingertips and nails  white lines running across the nails  dark stripes running down the nail  red or brown little streaks under the nails  a destroyed nail  infected nail fold (painful, red and swollen skin next to the nail) Brittle or crumbly nails Brittle nails are often just a sign of ageing or long-term exposure to water or chemicals such as detergents and nail polish. Nails can be strengthened by taking biotin (vitamin B7) supplements, by wearing gloves for all wet work and by frequently applying moisturising cream to the nails. Sometimes, brittle or crumbly nails can be caused by: a fungal nail infection, which can be cleared by taking a course of antifungal tablets (this especially tends to be the cause for crumbly toenails) a skin condition called lichen planus, which can just affect the nails an underactive thyroid or overactive thyroid, where the thyroid gland either doesn't produce enough hormones or produces too many nail psoriasis, a long-term skin condition that can cause the nails to become crumbly A less common cause of crumbly nails is reactive arthritis, an unusual reaction of the immune system affecting the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection. If you have a combination of symptoms affecting different parts of your body, your GP might consider this condition. Discoloured nails The most common causes of a yellow nail are fungal nail infections or nail psoriasis. Yellow nails can also result from any of the following: frequent application of nail varnish lymphoedema, a long-term condition that causes swelling of the skin permanent damage to your airways caused by bronchiectasis (a long-term lung condition) sinusitis (inflammation of the lining of the sinuses) inflammation of the thyroid gland, found in the neck tuberculosis (TB), a bacterial infection affecting the lungs jaundice (yellowing of the skin) due to liver disease some drugs, such as mepacrine or carotene   chronic paronychia (infection of the nail fold) Green-black nails can be caused by overgrowth of bacteria called pseudomonas, especially under loose nails. This can be treated by applying antibiotic eye drops underneath the nails or soaking the affected nails in an antiseptic solution or vinegar. Grey nails can be caused by medication such as antimalarials or minocycline. Brown nails can sometimes be caused by thyroid disease, pregnancy, malnutrition and frequent use of nail varnish. Red or yellow drop under the nail If the discolouration looks like a drop of oil under the nail plate or is the colour of salmon, you may have psoriasis of the nails. Half white, half brown nails Fingernails that are half white and half brown (brown near the tips) can be a sign of kidney failure, where the kidneys stop working properly. The link is not fully understood, but one theory is that kidney failure causes chemical changes in the blood that encourage melanin (a skin pigment) to be released into the nail bed. It's also possible that kidney failure causes an increase in the number of tiny blood vessels in the nail bed. It's estimated up to 40% of people with kidney failure have \"half-and-half\" fingernails. Half-and-half nails have also been seen in some people with AIDS and can be seen following chemotherapy. White nails If most of the nail plate has turned white and it's not because the nail has become detached from the nail bed, it's likely to be either a fungal nail infection or a sign of decreased blood supply to the nail bed, known as \"Terry's nails\". Terry's nails are typically white with reddened or dark tips and can be a sign of a wide range of medical conditions, including the following: liver cirrhosis (scarring and damage to the liver) \u2013 about 80% of people with cirrhosis have Terry's nails liver, kidney or heart failure diabetes iron-deficiency anaemia \u2013 a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body chemotherapy an overactive thyroid (where the thyroid gland in your neck produces too many hormones) malnutrition  Thickened, overgrown nails A common cause of thickened nails is a fungal nail infection. This can also cause them to discolour and become crumbly (see above). Other possible causes of thickened or overgrown nails are: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin long-term pressure from shoes that are either too small or too narrow over the toes reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection Severely overgrown horn-like nails Sometimes, the big toenails become so overgrown and thickened that they resemble claws and are almost impossible to cut with conventional nail clippers. This nail disorder is known as onychogryphosis (\"ram's horn nails\"), and is seen in older people or as a response to long-term pressure on the nails. Regular chiropody can help, but sometimes the nails need to be removed by a podiatrist or doctor. Loose nails It's normal for a toenail to come loose and fall off after an injury to the toe. However, if you haven't injured your nail, a loose nail is often caused by over-manicuring the nails and cleaning under the nails with a sharp object. Less commonly, it may be a sign of one of the following health conditions: a fungal nail infection psoriasis of the nail \u2013 psoriasis is a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin warts that cluster around the fingernail an overactive thyroid, which means the thyroid gland in the neck is producing too many hormones  sarcoidosis, a condition where small clumps of cells form in the organs and tissues of the body amyloidosis, where protein builds up in the organs a problem with the connective tissue fibres in the body that support the organs and body tissues poor circulation, for example caused by smoking or Raynaud's disease  an allergic reaction to medicine (usually to a type of antibiotic) or nail cosmetics A loose nail should be cut back to where it's detached to allow the nail to become reattached as it grows. You shouldn't clean your nails with anything other than a soft nailbrush. Indented spoon-shaped nails (koilonychia) If your fingernails curve inwards like spoons (known medically as koilonychia), you may have one of the following disorders: iron-deficiency anaemia, which is a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body haemochromatosis, where the body contains too much iron Raynaud\u2019s disease, a common condition affecting the blood supply to the fingers and toes, causing them to turn white  lupus erythematosus, an uncommon condition where the immune system attacks the body's cells, tissues and organs Pitting or dents on the nails Pitting or small dents on the surface of your nails can be a sign of any of the following diseases: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin (10%-50% of patients with psoriasis have pitted nails) eczema, a long-term skin condition reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection alopecia areata, patches of hair loss that tend to come and go Grooves across the fingernails (Beau's lines) Deep lines or grooves that go from left to right across the nail are known as Beau's lines. They may be a sign of: a previous illness \u2013 the line forms at the time of the illness  chemotherapy a previous injury previous exposure to extremely cold temperatures, if you have Raynaud's disease Illness, injury or cold temperatures can interrupt nail growth and cause nail grooves to form at the base of the nails. These grooves tend to only be noticed a few months later, when the nails have grown and the grooves have moved up the nails to become visible. It takes about four to six months for a fingernail to fully grow out, and 6-12 months for a toenail. Unusually curved fingertips and nails Clubbing of the fingertips means the tissue beneath the nails thickens and the fingertips become rounded and bulbous. The fingernails curve over the rounded fingertips. Clubbing is thought to result from increased blood flow to the fingertips. It can run in families and be entirely harmless. However, if it suddenly develops, it may be a sign of one of many possible medical conditions, including: long-term lung disease or heart disease, such as lung cancer, bronchiectasis, or endocarditis inflammatory bowel disease, a long-term disease that causes inflammation of the lining of the gut stomach cancer or bowel cancer cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) polycythaemia, a condition where the blood is too thick  White lines running across nails White spots or streaks are normal and nothing to worry about, but parallel white lines that extend all the way across the nails, known as Muehrcke's lines, are a sign of low levels of protein in the blood. In contrast to Beau's lines (see above), they're not grooved. They can be due to liver disease or malnutrition. Dark stripes running down the nail If you have dark skin, it's fairly common to find dark stripes running down your nails (linear melanonychia). This occurs in more than 77% of black people over the age of 20, and in most cases is perfectly normal. However, it's not something to ignore: dark stripes may sometimes be a form of skin cancer that affects the nail bed, called subungual melanoma. It's important that your doctor checks it to rule out melanoma. Generally, subungual melanoma only affects one nail. Also, it will cause the stripe to change in appearance (for example, it may become wider or darker over time) and the pigmentation may also affect the surrounding skin (the nail fold). Red or brown little streaks under the nails If you have what look like red or brown little streaks underneath the nails, it's likely these are splinter haemorrhages \u2013 lines of blood caused by tiny damaged blood vessels. Just a few splinters under one nail are nothing to worry about and most likely due to injury of the nail. However, if many nails are affected, these splinters may be a sign of lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, an infection of the heart valves (endocarditis) or another underlying disease. A destroyed nail Nails can be destroyed by: injury, including nail biting skin diseases such as psoriasis or lichen planus overgrowth of the surrounding tissues, which is usually harmless (for example, due to a wart or verruca) but can sometimes be cancerous nail patella syndrome \u2013 an uncommon genetic condition which may cause missing nails, usually at birth  If one of your nails becomes destroyed and you don't remember injuring it, it's important to see your GP. Painful, red and swollen nail fold (paronychia) Paronychia is the name for inflammation of the nail fold, which is the skin and soft tissue that frames and supports the nail. This is most often caused by infection, injury or irritation. It's about three times more common in women than in men. Sometimes, there's an underlying skin condition such as eczema or psoriasis or another medical condition such as diabetes or HIV. Paronychia can be acute, where it develops over a few hours, or chronic, where it lasts more than six weeks. Acute paronychia Acute infective paronychia usually starts after a minor injury to the nail fold, such as from nail biting, picking or manicures. The affected area is red, warm, tender and swollen. After a while pus may be seen, which can form around the nail and may lift the nail. Acute paronychia is often caused by Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, although any number of germs can be involved. Treatment is with antibiotic creams or tablets. If there's a large amount of pus, it can help to have this surgically drained. Sometimes, acute paronychia is caused by the cold sore virus, in which case it's known as herpetic whitlow. Acute paronychia can completely clear in a few days with treatment, but if it's not treated or doesn't respond to treatment, it can become long-term (chronic). Chronic paronychia Chronic paronychia may start more gradually and be more difficult to get rid of. It's most common in people who often have their hands in water or chemicals, such as cleaners, bartenders, canteen staff or fishmongers. It may start in one nail fold but can affect several fingers. The affected nail folds are swollen and may be red and sore from time to time, often after exposure to water. The nail plate gradually becomes thickened and ridged as it grows, and may become yellow or green and brittle. The skin in chronic paronychia is often colonised by a mixture of yeasts and bacteria. These germs thrive on previously damaged skin, without necessarily starting the skin damage in the first place. To settle chronic paronychia, both the skin damage and the colonisation with germs needs to be addressed. It can take months for chronic paronychia to clear, and after that up to a year for nails to grow back to normal. You may find that doing things such as keeping your hands dry and warm, frequently using emollient hand cream and avoiding biting and picking your nails can help.  See your GP if the condition is severe. Depending on the type of paronychia, creams and\/or tablets may be prescribed. Use these as directed. You may be referred to a dermatologist for further investigation of the underlying skin disease or for contact allergy testing, and for treatment advice. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1190 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 662  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 277  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 143  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the nail abnormalities information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/nail_abnormalities_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Foot health Nail patella syndrome Fungal nail infection Ingrown toenail External links DermNet NZ: pictures of nail disease Getting help from the podiatrist Taking care of your feet is essential. Here's how podiatrists and chiropodists can help Footcare services for older people If you're having trouble with tasks such as cutting your toenails, local footcare services can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Onychomycosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Fungal-nail-infection","content":"Fungal nail infection - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Fungal nail infection  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Fungal-nail-infection Community Fungal-nail-infection Clinical trials Fungal nail infection Fungal-nail-infection Treatment   Many people develop a fungal nail infection at some point in their life. It's not usually serious, but can be unpleasant and difficult to treat. The infection develops slowly and causes the nail to become discoloured, thickened and distorted. Toenails are more frequently affected than the fingernails. The medical name for a fungal nail infection is onychomycosis. This page covers: Symptoms Causes Treatments Prevention Symptoms of a fungal nail infection A fungal nail infection may not cause any obvious symptoms at first. As it progresses, the infection can cause: discolouration of the nail \u2013 it may turn white, black, yellow or green thickening and distortion of the nail \u2013 it may become an unusual shape or texture and be difficult to trim pain or discomfort \u2013 particularly when using or placing pressure on the affected toe or finger brittle or crumbly nails \u2013 pieces may break off and come away completely Sometimes the skin nearby may also become infected and be itchy and cracked or red and swollen. Causes of fungal nail infections Most fungal nail infections occur as a result of the fungi that cause athlete's foot infecting the nails. These fungi often live harmlessly on your skin, but they can sometimes multiply and lead to infections. The fungi prefer warm, dark and moist places like the feet. You're more likely to get a fungal nail infection if you: don't keep your feet clean and dry wear shoes that cause your feet to get hot and sweaty walk around barefoot in places where fungal infections can spread easily, such as communal showers, locker rooms and gyms have damaged your nails have a weakened immune system have certain other health conditions, such as diabetes, psoriasis or peripheral arterial disease  Fungal nail infections can be spread to other people, so you should take steps to avoid this (see below) if you have an infection. Treatments for fungal nail infections Treatment isn't always needed for a mild fungal nail infection because it's unlikely to cause any further problems and you may feel it's not worth treating. Whether you decide to have treatment or not, you should still practise good foot hygiene (see below) to stop the infection getting worse or spreading to others. Speak to your GP or pharmacist if you're bothered by the appearance of the affected nail, or it's causing problems such as pain and discomfort. They'll probably recommend: antifungal tablets \u2013 tablets taken once or twice a day for several months antifungal nail paints \u2013 special paints applied directly to the nail over several months nail softening kits \u2013 where a paste is used to soften infected parts of the nail, before they're removed with a scraping device A procedure to remove the nail completely may be recommended in severe cases. Laser treatment, where a high-energy laser is used to destroy the fungus, is also an option. But this is only available privately and can be expensive. Read more about treating a fungal nail infection. Preventing fungal nail infections You can reduce your risk of developing a fungal nail infection by: keeping your hands and feet clean and dry wearing well-fitting shoes made of natural materials and clean cotton socks \u2013 these will allow your feet to \"breathe\" clipping your nails to keep them short \u2013 don't share clippers or scissors with other people not sharing towels and socks with other people, and ensure your towels are washed regularly not walking around barefoot in public pools, showers, and locker rooms \u2013 special shower shoes are available to protect your feet replacing old footwear that could be contaminated with fungi treating athlete's foot as soon as possible to avoid the infection spreading to your nails Nail salon equipment can sometimes be the source of fungal nail infections. If you regularly visit a salon, make sure any equipment used is properly sterilised between uses. Page last reviewed: 22\/09\/2015 Next review due: 22\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 659 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 303  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the nail abnormalities information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/nail_abnormalities_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medicines Athlete's foot Find podiatrist and chiropodist services Foot health Nail abnormalities External links British Association of Dermatologists: fungal infections of the nails (PDF, 270kb) The College of Podiatry: athlete's foot Foot health How to keep your feet healthy and choose the right sports shoes, plus what to do if you have smelly feet Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Operation, going into hospital","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/surgery","content":"Having an operation (surgery) - Overview - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Having an operation (surgery)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview surgery Real stories Having an operation surgery Seeing a specialist surgery Before surgery surgery On the day surgery After surgery surgery Getting back to normal   If you're considering having an operation or your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you. It will take you through all the steps in the process, from referral to recovery, so you're fully prepared and know what questions to ask at each stage. Before you start, you'll need to decide which hospital you'd like to be referred to. Our tips on choosing a hospital can help. You can also compare hospitals by following these steps: search for hospitals by surgical procedure enter your postcode and the name of your operation you'll be taken to a page listing the hospitals that can carry out the operation using the columns and drop-down menu, you can compare hospitals based on things such as performance, safety, complaints and facilities Once you've chosen your hospital, your GP will refer you to see a specialist at this hospital. You can find out more about each stage of the treatment journey by using the links below: Seeing a specialist \u2013 an initial consultation to discuss your treatment options and agree what's right for you. Preparing for surgery \u2013 what to do in the days leading up to surgery, and your pre-operative assessment. Day of the operation \u2013 arriving at hospital, information for visitors, and what happens before you go into theatre. After surgery \u2013 coming round from the operation and being discharged from hospital. Getting back to normal \u2013 general advice and typical recovery times. Page last reviewed: 15\/01\/2015 Next review due: 15\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 249 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Guide to waiting times Children in hospital Can I use my mobile phone in hospital? My NHS - performance information Same-sex accommodation video External links British Medical Association Care Quality Commission Choose and Book Get Well Soon Royal College of Anaesthetists Going into hospital with a learning disability If you care for someone who has a significant learning disability, these 10 steps can help make their hospital visits a success NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oral cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-mouth","content":"Mouth cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Mouth cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-mouth Clinical trials Mouth cancer Cancer-of-the-mouth Symptoms Cancer-of-the-mouth Causes Cancer-of-the-mouth Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-mouth Treatment Cancer-of-the-mouth Complications Cancer-of-the-mouth Living with Introduction  Mouth cancer, also known as oral cancer, is where a tumour develops on the surface of the tongue, mouth, lips or gums. Tumours can also occur in the salivary glands, tonsils and the pharynx (the part of the throat from your mouth to your windpipe) but these are less common. Symptoms of mouth cancer include: red or white patches on the lining of your mouth or tongue ulcers a lump See your GP if these symptoms do not heal within three weeks, especially if you're a heavy drinker or smoker. Types of mouth cancer A cancer that develops on the inside or outside layer of the body is called a carcinoma and these types of cancer are categorised by the type of cells the cancer starts in. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common type of mouth cancer, accounting for nine out of 10 cases. Squamous cells are found in many places around the body, including the inside of the mouth and under the skin. Less common types of mouth cancer include: oral malignant melanoma \u2013 where the cancer starts in cells called melanocytes, which help give skin its colour adenocarcinomas \u2013 cancers that develop inside the salivary glands What causes mouth cancer? Mouth cancer occurs when something goes wrong with the normal cell lifecycle, causing them to grow and reproduce uncontrollably. Risk factors for developing mouth cancer include: smoking or using products that contain tobacco drinking alcohol \u2013 smokers who are also heavy drinkers have a much higher risk compared to the population at large infection with the human papilloma virus (HPV), the virus that causes genital warts Read more about the causes of mouth cancer. Who is affected by mouth cancer? Mouth cancer is an uncommon type of cancer, accounting for one in 50 of all cancer cases. In the UK, just over 6,767 new cases of mouth cancer were diagnosed in 2011 (the latest reliable data). Most cases of mouth cancer first develop in older adults who are between 50-74 years of age. Mouth cancer can occur in younger adults, but it's thought that HPV infection may be responsible for the majority of cases that occur in younger people. Mouth cancer is more common in men than in women. This is thought to be due to the fact that, on average, men drink more alcohol than women. Treating mouth cancer There are three main treatment options for mouth cancer. They are: surgery \u2013 where the cancerous cells are surgically removed and, in some cases, some of the surrounding tissue chemotherapy \u2013 where powerful medications are used to kill cancerous cells radiotherapy \u2013 where high energy X-rays are used to kill cancerous cells These treatments are often used in combination. For example, a course of radiotherapy and chemotherapy may be given after surgery to help prevent the cancer returning. Read more about treating mouth cancer. Complications of mouth cancer Both surgery and radiotherapy can make speaking and swallowing difficult (dysphagia). Dysphagia can be a potentially serious problem. If small pieces of food enter your airways and become lodged in your lungs, it could trigger a chest infection, known as aspiration pneumonia. Read more about the complications of mouth cancer. Reducing the risk The three most effective ways to prevent mouth cancer from developing \u2013 or prevent it reocurring after successful treatment \u2013 are: not smoking keeping to the recommended weekly limits for alcohol consumption (21 units for men and 14 units for women (read more about alcohol units) eating a 'Mediterranean-style diet', with plenty of fresh vegetables (particularly tomatoes), citrus fruits, olive oil and fish (read more about healthy eating) It's also important that you have regular dental check-ups because dentists can often spot the early stages of mouth cancer. Outlook If mouth cancer is diagnosed early, a complete cure is often possible using a combination of radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgery. The outlook for mouth cancer can vary depending on which part of the mouth is affected and whether it has spread from the mouth into surrounding tissue. The outlook is much better if the cancer is diagnosed early. Overall, an estimated 40% of people with cancer affecting the mouth and pharyx will live at least five years after their diagnosis and many people live much longer. However, the outlook is better for cancer affecting certain areas of the mouth, such as the lip, tongue or oral cavity. Mouth cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Carrie Newlands, consultant oral and maxillofacial surgeon, talks about the causes and symptoms of mouth cancer. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Head and neck cancers Mouth cancer is a type of cancer that comes under the umbrella term 'cancers of the head and neck'. Other types of head and neck cancers include: cancer of the oesophagus (gullet) cancer of the larynx (voice box) cancer of the nasopharynx (the area where the nose and throat connect) cancer of the thyroid gland (a gland located on either side of the windpipe) Page last reviewed: 05\/06\/2014 Next review due: 05\/06\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 296 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 142  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Drinking and alcohol Find cancer support services Head and neck cancer Living with cancer Radiotherapy Stop smoking External links British Dental Health Foundation: mouth cancer awareness Cancer Research UK: mouth and oropharyngeal cancer Macmillan Cancer Support: head and neck cancers Mouth Cancer Foundation My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Smokefree Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oral erythema migrans","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tongue-pain","content":"Sore or painful tongue - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sore or painful tongue  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Sore tongue Introduction  A sore or painful tongue is usually caused by something obvious and visible, although there are a few less obvious causes you should be aware of that may need treating. If the pain is persistent and you haven't accidentally bitten or burnt your tongue, see your GP or dentist. There may be an underlying problem that needs treating, and your GP or dentist may be able to advise you about pain relief while you wait for it to get better. This page outlines the most likely causes of tongue pain, but you shouldn't use it to diagnose yourself with a condition \u2013 always leave that to a healthcare professional. Common causes Common causes of tongue pain are outlined below. Geographic tongue Also known as benign migratory glossitis or oral erythema migrans, geographic tongue is a common condition that causes irregular red patches surrounded by white lines to develop on the tongue, giving it a map-like appearance. In some people, the red patches may feel sore or sensitive to certain foods and drinks. You may notice that after a few days, weeks or months the position of these lines and patches change. They may disappear and re-appear later on a different part of the tongue. Some people find the condition improves over time, while for others it may be persistent. See your GP or dentist if you have persistent discoloured or painful patches on your tongue. It\u2019s not clear exactly what causes geographic tongue and there is no specific treatment for it, but you may be able to manage the pain by taking over-the-counter painkillers (speak to your pharmacist for advice) and avoiding anything that makes it worse, such as acidic, spicy or hot foods. Oral thrush Oral thrush is an infection in the mouth caused by a fungus, which can cause a coated or white tongue and areas of soreness. You are more likely to develop oral thrush if you: have recently taken antibiotics have poor oral hygiene wear dentures (false teeth), particularly if they don't fit properly have a weakened immune system have diabetes You should see your GP if you think you have oral thrush. If it is left untreated, the symptoms will persist and your mouth will continue to be uncomfortable. Oral thrush is treated with antifungal medicines taken for around a week. These usually come in the form of gels or liquid that you apply directly inside your mouth, although tablets or capsules are sometimes used. Aphthous mouth ulcers Aphthous mouth ulcers are painful sores that can occur anywhere within the mouth and are common on the underside of the tongue. Many mouth ulcers are caused by damage to the mouth, such as from accidentally biting your tongue or eating something hard and sharp. Ulcers that keep recurring have been linked to things such as stress, anxiety, hormone changes, certain foods and stopping smoking. Read more about the causes of mouth ulcers. Most mouth ulcers heal within a week or two and you may be able to manage the pain in the meantime by taking over-the-counter painkillers and avoiding anything that worsens it, such as spicy foods. See your GP or dentist if you have an ulcer that doesn\u2019t improve within a few weeks or if you develop ulcers regularly. Less common causes Less commonly, tongue pain may be caused by: a viral infection \u2013 such as an infection by viruses that cause hand, foot and mouth disease or cold sores vitamin deficiencies and anaemia \u2013 a sore tongue can sometimes be a symptom of iron deficiency anaemia and vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia median rhomboid glossitis \u2013 where a smooth, red, inflamed patch develops on the middle or back of the tongue, thought to result from a fungal infection glossodynia or \"burning mouth syndrome\" \u2013 a burning pain on the tip of the tongue that is often seen in people with depression glossopharyngeal neuralgia \u2013 repeated episodes of severe tongue pain believed to be caused by nerve irritation lichen planus \u2013 a long-term skin condition that causes an itchy rash and can also affect the mouth, causing a white lacy pattern and painful patches on the tongue Behçet's disease \u2013 a rare condition that causes inflammation of the blood vessels and can also lead to painful mouth ulcers  pemphigus vulgaris \u2013 a rare and serious condition that causes painful blisters to develop on the skin, as well as inside the mouth, nose, throat, anus and genitals medications \u2013 painful mouth ulcers can be a side effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and beta-blockers, and certain mouthwashes can cause tongue pain in some people Moeller's glossitis \u2013 a type of inflammation of the tongue cancer of the tongue \u2013 although this is rare Click on the above links for more information about these conditions and medications. Oral thrush can cause sore white plaques on the tongue  Page last reviewed: 13\/11\/2014 Next review due: 13\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 634 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 244  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 192  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coated or white tongue Iron deficiency anaemia Mouth ulcers Oral thrush Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia External links Behçet's Syndrome Society DermNet NZ: geographic tongue Mouth ulcers Mouth ulcers are painful round or oval sores that form in the mouth, most often on the inside of the cheeks or lips Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oral thrush in adults","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Oral-thrush---adults","content":"Oral thrush in adults - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oral thrush in adults  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Oral-thrush---adults Clinical trials Oral thrush in adults Introduction  Oral thrush is a fungal infection of the mouth. It is not contagious and is usually successfully treated with antifungal medication. It is also called oral candidosis (or candiasis) because it is caused by a group of yeasts called Candida. Symptoms of oral thrush can include: white patches (plaques) in the mouth that can often be wiped off, leaving behind red areas that may bleed slightly loss of taste or an unpleasant taste in the mouth redness inside the mouth and throat cracks at the corners of the mouth a painful, burning sensation in the mouth In some cases, the symptoms of oral thrush can make eating and drinking difficult. When to seek medical advice Speak to your GP if you develop symptoms of oral thrush. If left untreated, the symptoms will often persist and your mouth will continue to feel uncomfortable. In severe cases that are left untreated, there is also a risk of the infection spreading further into your body, which can be serious. Your GP will usually be able to diagnose oral thrush simply by examining your mouth. Sometimes they may also recommend blood tests to look for certain conditions associated with oral thrush, such as diabetes and nutritional deficiencies. What causes oral thrush? Low numbers of the fungus Candida are naturally found in the mouth and digestive system of most people. They don't usually cause any problems, but can lead to oral thrush if they multiply. There are a number of reasons why this may happen, including: taking a course of antibiotics, particularly over a long period or at a high dose taking inhaled corticosteroid medication for asthma wearing dentures (false teeth), particularly if they don't fit properly having poor oral hygiene having a dry mouth, either because of a medical condition or a medication you are taking smoking having chemotherapy or radiotherapy to treat cancer Babies, young children and elderly people are at a particularly high risk of developing oral thrush, as are people with certain underlying conditions, including diabetes, an iron deficiency or vitamin B12 deficiency, an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) and HIV. As most people already have Candida fungi living in their mouth, oral thrush is not contagious. This means it cannot be passed to others. Treating oral thrush Oral thrush can usually be successfully treated with antifungal medicines. These usually come in the form of gels or liquid that you apply directly inside your mouth (topical medication), although tablets or capsules are sometimes used. Topical medication will usually need to be used several times a day for around 7 to 14 days. Tablet or capsules are usually taken once daily. These medications don't often have side effects, although some can cause nausea (feeling sick), vomiting, bloating, abdominal (tummy) pain and diarrhoea. If antibiotics or corticosteroids are thought to be causing your oral thrush, the medicine \u2013 or the way it is delivered \u2013 may need to be changed or the dosage reduced. Preventing oral thrush There are a number of things you can do to reduce your chances of developing oral thrush, including: rinsing your mouth after meals brushing your teeth twice a day with a toothpaste that contains fluoride and interdental cleaning (flossing) regularly visiting your dentist regularly for check-ups, even if you wear dentures or have no natural teeth removing your dentures every night, cleaning them with paste or soap and water before soaking them in a solution of water and denture-cleaning tablets brushing your gums, tongue and inside your mouth with a soft brush twice a day if you wear dentures or have no or few natural teeth visiting your dentist if your dentures do not fit properly stopping smoking if you smoke rinsing your mouth with water and spitting it out after using a corticosteroid inhaler, and using a spacer (a plastic cylinder that attaches to the inhaler) when you take your medicine ensuring that any underlying condition you have, such as diabetes, is well controlled If you have a condition or are receiving treatment that could put you at a high risk of developing oral thrush, your doctor may recommend taking a course of antifungal medication to prevent this happening. Read more about dental health and looking after dentures. Other types of thrush Thrush can also affect the vagina, skin and the head of the penis (glans). For more information about other types of thrush, see: oral thrush in babies vaginal thrush thrush in men Page last reviewed: 14\/08\/2014 Next review due: 14\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 683 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 282  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 163  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 128  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Explore this topic Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Corticosteroids Dental health Dentures Oral thrush in babies Thrush in men Vaginal thrush External links Dental Health Foundation: thrush Diabetes UK Coated tongue Common causes, and what you can do Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oral thrush in babies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Oral-thrush---babies","content":"Oral thrush in babies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oral thrush in babies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Oral-thrush---babies Clinical trials Oral thrush in babies   Oral thrush in babies and young children is a fungal infection in the mouth that's usually harmless and easily treatable. Although babies and young children are particularly at risk, oral thrush can also affect adults. Read about: Oral thrush in adults This topic covers: Signs of oral thrush When to seek medical advice Causes of oral thrush Treating oral thrush Advice for breastfeeding mothers Preventing oral thrush Signs of oral thrush in babies The main sign of oral thrush is a white coating on your baby's tongue, although there may also be white patches elsewhere in the mouth. This coating may look like curd or cottage cheese and usually can't be rubbed off easily. If your baby has a white coating on their tongue that does rub off easily, it's more likely to be milk coating the tongue and not thrush. Babies may not seem bothered by the patches, but they may be reluctant to feed \u2013 or keep detaching from the breast during feeds \u2013 if they're sore. There may also be associated nappy rash caused by the same infection that needs to be treated as well. When to seek medical advice Oral thrush in babies isn't usually serious, but you should visit your GP if you think your child may have the condition. You can also ask your health visitor for advice or call NHS 111. If there's any doubt about the diagnosis, your GP may take a swab from your baby's mouth and send it to a lab to be tested. Causes of oral thrush in babies Oral thrush is caused by a yeast fungus called Candida albicans. Healthy people have this fungus in their mouths and it doesn't normally cause problems. But it can overgrow and infect the membranes in the mouth. Babies are at an increased risk of oral thrush because their immune systems haven't yet fully developed and are less able to resist infection. This is particularly the case with babies born prematurely (before 37 weeks of pregnancy). Oral thrush can also affect babies if they've recently been treated with antibiotics. Antibiotics reduce the levels of healthy bacteria in your baby's mouth, which can allow fungus levels to increase. If you're breastfeeding and have been taking antibiotics for an infection, your own levels of healthy bacteria in your body can be affected. This can also make you prone to a thrush infection that may then be passed to your baby during breastfeeding. Treating oral thrush in babies If your GP or health visitor feels your baby needs treatment, they'll probably prescribe an antifungal medicine. The two main antifungal medicines used to treat oral thrush in babies are: miconazole nystatin These medications usually need to be used up to four times a day and are most effective if used after your baby has had a feed or drink. Continue to use the medicine for two days after the infection has cleared up as this will help prevent the infection coming back. If treatment hasn't fully cleared the thrush after a week of treatment, speak to your GP or health visitor again for advice. Miconazole In most cases, miconazole will be the first treatment recommended by a GP. It's available as a gel that you apply to the affected areas using a clean finger. It's important only to apply a little at a time and to try to avoid the back of your baby's mouth to reduce the risk of choking. A small number of babies are sick after being treated with miconazole, but this side effect usually passes and isn't normally any cause for concern. Nystatin In some cases, your GP or health visitor may recommend an alternative medication called nystatin. This comes as a liquid medicine (suspension) that's applied directly to the affected area using a dropper (oral dispenser) supplied with the medicine. Nystatin doesn't usually cause any side effects and most babies have no trouble taking the medication. Advice for breastfeeding mothers If your baby has oral thrush and you're breastfeeding, it's possible for your baby to pass a thrush infection to you. This can affect your nipples or breasts and cause nipple thrush. Symptoms of nipple thrush can include: pain while you're feeding your baby, which may continue after the feed is finished cracked, flaky or sensitive nipples and areolas (the darker area around your nipple) changes in the colour of your nipples or areolas If you have nipple thrush, or there's a risk of your baby passing thrush on to you, you'll normally be advised to continue breastfeeding while using an antifungal cream such as miconazole to treat the infection. You should apply the cream to your nipples after every feed, and remove any that's left before the next feed. In severe cases of nipple thrush, antifungal tablets may be recommended. Preventing oral thrush in babies It's not clear whether it's possible to prevent oral thrush in babies. Some doctors suggest the following advice may help: sterilise dummies regularly, as well as any toys that your baby puts in their mouth sterilise bottles and other feeding equipment regularly, especially the teats Washing your hands thoroughly after changing your baby's nappy can also be helpful in stopping thrush spreading because the infection can be passed through their digestive system. Page last reviewed: 19\/07\/2016 Next review due: 19\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 224 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breastfeeding and thrush Can my baby's oral thrush affect me if I'm breastfeeding? Oral thrush in adults External links Breastfeeding Network Family Lives Breastfeeding and thrush Breast and nipple pain in breastfeeding women is sometimes caused by a thrush (candida) infection in the breast. Find out how to spot and treat thrush Soothing a crying baby It can be hard to know what a crying baby needs, especially in the early days. Use these tips to help soothe them Medicines for babies and children Not all medicines are suitable for young children. Find out what to use to treat your sick child NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Orf","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/orf\/Pages\/Introduction.aspx","content":"Orf - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Orf  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Orf is a viral skin disease that can be spread to humans by handling infected sheep and goats. The disease \u2013 caused by a parapoxvirus \u2013 is also known as: contagious ecthyma contagious pustular dermatitis scabby mouth This page covers: Symptoms of orf How orf is spread How orf is treated Complications of orf Symptoms of orf In humans, the first sign of orf is a small, red, itchy or painful lump (lesion) that usually appears on the fingers, hands, forearms or face after an incubation period of three to five days. In some cases there may be more than one lesion. The lesion will usually be firm, red or blue in colour and 2-5cm in diameter. As the condition progresses over a three- to six-week period, a pustule or blister that weeps fluid will develop on top and eventually crust over. Other possible symptoms include a mild fever (high temperature), general tiredness (fatigue) and enlarged lymph glands. How orf is spread Orf is a zoonotic disease (zoonosis), which means it can pass between animals and humans. It's not possible for humans to pass the virus on to each other. The virus is spread by handling infected sheep or goats, infected carcasses, or contaminated material. Handling infected animals near their mouth is thought to increase the risk of orf. People who make direct, close contact with infected animals are most at risk, including: farmers sheep shearers vets butchers People with a weakened immune system (immunocompromised), open wounds, or other skin diseases are more likely to be infected with orf and should take extra care around affected animals. The best way to prevent the spread of orf is to follow good hygienic practices when handling or rearing sheep and goats. This includes wearing protective gloves, good hand hygiene, and vaccinating animals at risk. How orf is treated Orf is a self-limiting disease, which means it will get better on its own without treatment. It usually clears up within three to six weeks. It may be useful to cover the lesion with a sterile (hygienic) dressing and immobilise your finger to help reduce discomfort. Read more about applying plasters and other dressings. You should see your GP if the lesion isn't healing, you develop a fever (high temperature) or you're in severe pain, as some people also develop a bacterial infection. This may require treatment with antibiotics. In rare cases the lesion may not go away and a minor surgical procedure may be required to remove it. Although there's some evidence to suggest that using topical imiquimod cream may help to reduce lesions, you should speak to your GP or pharmacist for advice first. Complications of orf People with weakened immune systems are more likely to develop complications of orf \u2013 for example, people with HIV or lupus, or someone who is receiving chemotherapy. Possible complications include: larger or unusual lesions widespread blisters erythema multiforme \u2013 a large, red skin rash bullous pemphigoid \u2013 a blistering skin disease (in rare cases) Page last reviewed: 07\/04\/2016 Next review due: 07\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Animal and human bites Cuts and grazes First aid External links GOV.UK: controlling disease in farm animals GOV.UK: zoonotic diseases investigation guidelines First aid What to do if someone is injured in an accident NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Organ donation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Organ-donation","content":"Organ donation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Organ donation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Organ-donation Real stories Organ-donation Clinical trials Organ donation Organ-donation What can be donated Organ-donation Living donation Organ-donation How it works Introduction  Organ donation is where a person donates their organs for transplant. There are two types of organ donation: living and deceased. Donated organs are given to someone who has damaged organs that need to be replaced. An organ transplant may save a person's life or significantly improve their health and quality of life. The need for donors Between April 1 2013 and March 31 2014, 4,655 organ transplants were carried out in the UK thanks to the generosity of 2,466 donors. But there are always significantly more people waiting for an organ transplant than there are suitable donors. At the time of writing (24 November 2014), 6,856 people were waiting for transplants. You can visit the NHS Organ Donation website for the latest statistics, including the average waiting times for a transplant. There's a particular need for more people of African, African-Caribbean and south Asian ethnicities to join the NHS Organ Donor Register and agree to donate their organs in the event of their death. This is because donation rates among these ethnic groups are low but the need is great. People from black, Asian and ethnic minority communities are more likely to develop health conditions that can lead to kidney failure, and on average they'll wait a year longer for a kidney transplant than a white patient. There's no upper age limit for joining the register and recording your wish to be a donor. If you die in circumstances where you could potentially donate, specialist healthcare professionals decide which organs and tissues are suitable based on a number of factors, including your medical and travel history. Tissue from people in their 70s and 80s is often transplanted successfully, although organs are only selected from those under 80 years of age. Most people waiting for a donated organ need to have a kidney, heart, lung or liver transplant. One donor can help several people as they can donate a number of organs, including: kidneys liver heart lungs small bowel pancreas Tissues that can be donated include:  the cornea (the transparent layer at the front of the eye) bone skin  heart valves tendons cartilage All donors can choose which organs and tissues they wish to donate. Read more about what organs can be donated. How to donate The NHS Organ Donor Register is a confidential national database that holds the details of around 21 million people who want to donate their organs when they die. Adding your name to the register and telling your family and friends that you want to be a donor will make it easier for them to agree to donation in the event of your death. You can join the register in a number of ways. For example, you can: complete an online form  call the free NHS Donor Line on 0300 123 23 23 \u2013 lines are open 24 hours a day, 365 days a year text SAVE to 62323 Read about how organ donation works for further details about joining the NHS Organ Donor Register and the donation process. Even though about a third of the population have joined the register, less than 5,000 people a year die in circumstances that allow them to donate their organs. This means it's even more important for as many people as possible to talk about donation and join the register so no donation is wasted. Remember to discuss your decision with your family so they're aware. Checking for a match When an organ becomes available for donation, it's checked to make sure it's healthy. The blood and tissue type of both donor and recipient are also checked to ensure they're compatible. The better the match, the greater the chance of a successful outcome. People from the same ethnic group are more likely to be a close match. Those with rare tissue types may only be able to accept an organ from someone of the same ethnic origin. This is why it's important that people from all ethnic backgrounds register to donate their organs. Types of donation There are three different ways of donating an organ. These are known as: donation after brain stem death donation after circulatory death living organ donation These are described below. Donation after brain stem death Most organ donors are patients who die as a result of a brain haemorrhage, severe head injury or stroke and are on a ventilator in a hospital intensive care unit (ICU). These donors are called donation after brain stem death donors. Death is diagnosed by brain stem tests. There are very strict standards for doing these tests and they're always carried out by two experienced doctors. A ventilator provides oxygen, which keeps the heart beating and blood circulating after death. Organs such as hearts, lungs and livers can be donated by a DBD donor. Donation after circulatory death Patients who die in hospital but aren't on a ventilator can donate their kidneys and, in certain circumstances, other organs. They're called donors after circulatory death. In these cases, the organs must be removed within a few minutes of the heart stopping to prevent them being damaged by a lack of oxygenated blood. Both types of donors can donate their corneas and other tissue. Living organ donation Living organ donation usually involves one family member donating an organ to another family member or partner. The relative is usually related by blood \u2013 a parent, brother, sister, or child. It's also now possible to be an altruistic donor. Altruistic donors are unrelated to the patient but become donors as an act of personal generosity. Kidneys are often donated from living donors as a healthy person can lead a normal life with only one kidney. Read more about living donation. Page last reviewed: 24\/11\/2014 Next review due: 24\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 312 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood donation Bone marrow donation Bone marrow transplant Can my organs be removed after I die? Heart-lung transplant Heart transplant Kidney transplant Liver transplant External links HTA: body, organ and tissue donations Join the organ donor register NHS Organ Donation The history of donation The history of blood and organ donation explained in an interactive timeline Could you be a donor? Every year 1,000 people die waiting for a transplant. It's easy to register as an organ donor or give blood NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cornea transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/corneatransplant","content":"Cornea transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cornea transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview corneatransplant Real stories corneatransplant Clinical trials Cornea transplant corneatransplant When it is needed corneatransplant How it is performed corneatransplant Risks corneatransplant Afterwards Introduction  A cornea transplant is an operation to remove all or part of a damaged cornea and replace it with healthy donor tissue. A cornea transplant is often referred to as keratoplasty or a corneal graft. It can be used to improve sight, relieve pain and treat severe infection or damage. One of the most common reasons for a cornea transplant is a condition called keratoconus, which causes the cornea to change shape. Read more about why you might need a cornea transplant. What is the cornea and what does it do? The cornea is the clear outer layer at the front of the eyeball. It acts as a window to the eye. The coloured iris and the pupil (the black dot in the centre of the iris) can be seen through the cornea. The cornea helps to focus light rays on to the retina (the light-sensitive film at the back of the eye). This \"picture\" is then transmitted to the brain. When the cornea is damaged, it can become less transparent or its shape can change. This can prevent light reaching the retina and causes the picture transmitted to the brain to be distorted or unclear. How is a transplant carried out? The type of cornea transplant you have will depend on which part of the cornea is damaged or how much of the cornea needs replacing. The options include: penetrating keratoplasty (PK) \u2013 a full-thickness transplant deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK) \u2013 replacing or reshaping the outer and middle (front) layers of the cornea endothelial keratoplasty (EK) \u2013 replacing the deeper (back) layers of the cornea  A cornea transplant can be carried out under general anaesthetic (where you are unconscious) or local anaesthetic (where the area is numbed and you're awake). The procedure usually takes less than an hour and, depending on your circumstances, you either leave hospital the same day or stay overnight.  If the procedure involves the transplantation of the outer cornea, the new outer cornea is held in place with stitches, which usually stay in for more than 12 months. An endothelial transplant (EK) doesn't require stitches. It's held in place by an air bubble until a few days later, when it naturally sticks to the deep layer of the cornea. In most cases, a cornea transplant procedure lasts less than an hour. Read more about how cornea transplants are performed. Are there any risks? As with all types of surgery, there is a risk of complications resulting from a cornea transplant. These can include the new cornea being rejected by the body, infection and further vision problems. Around 95% of full-thickness (penetrating) cornea transplants in low-risk conditions, such as keratoconus, last at least 10 years. Read more about the risks of a cornea transplant. After a cornea transplant The recovery time for a cornea transplant depends on the type of transplant you have. It takes about 18 months to enjoy the final results of a full-thickness transplant, although it's usually possible to provide glasses or a contact lens much earlier. Recovery is usually faster after replacing just the outer and middle layers (DALK). Endothelial transplants (EK) tend to have a faster recovery time of months or even weeks. It's important to take good care of your eye to improve your chances of a good recovery. This means not rubbing your eye and avoiding activities such as contact sports and swimming until you're told it's safe. Read more about recovering from a cornea transplant. Cornea donation There is a shortage of donated corneas in the UK. Many more people would benefit from sight-saving surgery if more corneas were donated. Read more about organ donation or register to become an organ donor. You can also call 0300 123 2323 if you wish to join the Organ Donor Register. Page last reviewed: 15\/05\/2015 Next review due: 15\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 196 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 131  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cornea transplant Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An opthhalmologist talks about the reasons for corneal transplant and what happens during and after surgery. Media last reviewed: 10\/07\/2015 Next review due: 10\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Eye health Find visual impairment services Organ donation Visual impairment External links NHS Blood and Transplant (NHSBT) NHSBT Organ Donation: corneas RNIB Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register Waiting for a transplant There are thousands of people waiting for transplants. Organ donation can transform their lives NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Heart transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/heart-transplant","content":"Heart transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Heart transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview heart-transplant Real stories heart-transplant Clinical trials Heart transplant heart-transplant Who can have one heart-transplant Waiting list heart-transplant What happens heart-transplant Living with heart-transplant Risks   A heart transplant is an operation to replace a damaged or failing heart with a healthy heart from a donor who has recently died. It may be recommended when a person's life is at risk because their heart no longer works effectively. This page covers: Why they're carried out What happens Recovery Risks Outlook Why heart transplants are carried out A heart transplant may be considered if you have severe heart failure and medical treatments aren't helping. Conditions that may eventually require a heart transplant include: coronary heart disease \u2013 a build-up of fatty substances in the arteries supplying the heart, which block or interrupt blood flow to the heart cardiomyopathy \u2013 where the walls of the heart have become stretched, thickened or stiff congenital heart disease \u2013 birth defects that affect the normal workings of the heart If your doctor thinks you might benefit from a heart transplant, you'll need to have an in-depth assessment to check whether you're healthy enough to have one before being placed on a waiting list. Read more about who can have a heart transplant and being on the heart transplant waiting list. What happens during a heart transplant A heart transplant needs to be carried out as soon as possible after a donor heart becomes available. The procedure is performed under general anaesthetic (where you're asleep). While it's carried out, a heart-lung bypass machine will be used to keep your blood circulating with oxygen-rich blood. A cut is made in the middle of the chest. Your own heart is then removed, and the donor heart is connected to the main arteries and veins. The new heart should then begin beating normally. Read more about how a heart transplant is performed. Recovering from a heart transplant You'll usually need to stay in hospital for around two or three weeks after a heart transplant. Most people are able to start returning to many of their normal activities within a few months. Your transplant team can give you advice about how long you may need to avoid certain activities during your recovery. You'll need to have regular check-ups with your transplant team after the transplant. You'll also need to take medications called immunosuppressants for the rest of your life. Without these medicines, your body may recognise your new heart as foreign and attack it (known as rejection). Read more about recovering from a heart transplant. Risks of a heart transplant A heart transplant is a complex and risky procedure. Possible complications include: the immune system recognising the transplanted heart as foreign and attacking it (rejection) the donated heart fails to work properly (graft failure) narrowing of the arteries supplying the heart (cardiac allograft vasculopathy) side effects from the immunosuppressant medication, such as an increased vulnerability to infections, weight gain and kidney problems Many of these problems are treatable, although sometimes another heart transplant may need to be carried out if possible. Read more about the risks associated with a heart transplant. Outlook for heart transplants Most people can eventually return to their normal activities after a heart transplant and experience a significant improvement in their symptoms for many years. However, it's a major operation and some of the complications can be life threatening. Overall: 80-90 in every 100 people will live at least a year 70-75 in every 100 people will live at least five years 50 in every 100 people will live at least 10 years Some people have survived for more than 25 years after a heart transplant. NHS Organ Donor Register If you're interested in donating your organs after you die, you can join the NHS Organ Donor Register. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick and simple, and will only take a few minutes of your time. You can remove yourself from the register at any time, and you can specify what you're willing to donate. Forum content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 25\/05\/2016 Next review due: 25\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 135 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Heart transplant Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Heart surgeon Professor John Dark explains what happens during a heart transplant and the potential quality of life afterwards. Media last reviewed: 10\/07\/2015 Next review due: 10\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Heart failure Organ donation External links British Heart Foundation Little Hearts Matter Organ Donation UK The Somerville Foundation Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Heart-lung transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Heart-lung-transplant","content":"Heart-lung transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Heart-lung transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Heart-lung-transplant Clinical trials Heart-lung transplant Heart-lung-transplant What happens Heart-lung-transplant Recovery Heart-lung-transplant Risks Introduction  A heart-lung transplant is a major and rarely performed surgical procedure where a person's diseased heart and lungs are replaced with those of a recently deceased donor. On average, only six heart-lung transplants are performed in the UK each year. This is because there are very few suitable donor organs available and priority is generally given to people who only need a heart transplant. When is a heart-lung transplant needed? A heart-lung transplant is the only treatment available for people who have combined heart and lung failure when all other treatment options have failed. The conditions that most often require a heart-lung transplant are: congenital heart disease \u2013 birth defects of the heart that impact the lungs pulmonary hypertension \u2013 where high blood pressure develops inside the blood vessels of the lungs, which can damage both the lungs and the heart Occasionally, a heart-lung transplant may be used to treat cystic fibrosis, a condition where the lungs and digestive system become clogged up with sticky mucus. Who can have one? The total number of available donor hearts and lungs is very small and the transplant operation places a major strain on the body. This means a heart-lung transplant will only be recommended after very careful consideration and an in-depth assessment of your physical and mental health. A person is usually only considered to be a suitable candidate for a transplant if they are in relatively good health and have no other serious medical problems. For example, a heart-lung transplant may not be recommended if you are elderly, have cancer, misuse alcohol or drugs, smoke, are obese, or have a long-term mental health condition. Specific criteria for people requiring a heart-lung transplant are currently being developed. For now, recommendations are made after consultation with a panel of transplant experts and members of your transplant team. The heart-lung transplant process If it's thought you might benefit from a heart-lung transplant, you'll be asked to have an assessment in hospital to check whether you are a suitable candidate for the procedure. This will involve a number of tests, which may include blood tests, urine tests, blood pressure tests, lung and heart function tests, X-rays and scans. If a heart-lung transplant is recommended after your assessment, you'll go on the transplant list to wait until suitable donor organs become available. The length of time spent on the waiting list can vary, but it can be several months or even years. When a set of donor heart and lungs becomes available, you'll be admitted to hospital for the operation, which usually takes several hours to complete. Most people need to stay in hospital for around three weeks after the procedure. Read more about what happens before and during a heart-lung transplant and recovering from a heart-lung transplant. What are the risks? A heart-lung transplant is a major procedure that carries a high risk of complications, some of which can be fatal. This is why the procedure is usually only carried out when all other treatment options have been exhausted and it's thought the potential benefits will outweigh the risks. The main risk after a heart-lung transplant is your immune system recognising the donated organs as not belonging to you and attacking them, which can stop the organs working properly. This can often be avoided by taking medication to suppress your immune system. However, these medications themselves can cause side effects, such as high blood pressure and increased vulnerability to infections. Read more about the risks of having a heart-lung transplant. Results The outcomes of heart-lung transplants have improved significantly since the operation was first carried out in the early 1980s, mainly because of the introduction of immunosuppressant medication. In the UK, around 85% of people who have a heart-lung transplant are still alive after one year. For those who survive to one year, the outlook is generally quite good, with most people surviving for at least 10 years and some people potentially living for 25 years or more. However, it's important to realise that survival rates are a guide and cannot predict outcomes for each person. There are many factors that could influence your own predicted survival, such as your age. Your transplant team will be able to provide you with more detailed information. Help and support Finding out that you need to have a transplant, waiting for suitable donor organs to become available, and actually having the transplant can be emotionally demanding for both you and your family. Most transplant teams are able to offer counselling for this. Alternatively, your GP may be able to refer you to a counsellor and provide you with information and advice about joining a support group in your area. There are a number of support groups, charities and other organisations that offer support and advice. These include: British Heart Foundation \u2013 a charity for people affected by heart disease British Lung Foundation \u2013 a charity for people affected by lung disease  Children's Heart Foundation \u2013 a charity for people affected by congenital heart disease   Little Hearts Matter \u2013 a charity that supports children with serious heart defects NHS Organ Donor Register Because of the limited availability of suitable organs, there is a need for members of the public to join the NHS Organ Donor Register. You can join the Organ Donor Register by completing a simple online form or calling the NHS Donor Line on 0300 123 23 23. Page last reviewed: 25\/03\/2015 Next review due: 25\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 38 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Congenital heart disease Cystic fibrosis Organ donation Pulmonary hypertension External links NHS Blood and Transplant Organ Donation UK Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register Waiting for a transplant There are thousands of people waiting for transplants. Organ donation can transform their lives NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Kidney transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Kidney-transplant","content":"Kidney transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Kidney transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Kidney-transplant Real stories Kidney-transplant Clinical trials Kidney-transplant Community Kidney transplant Kidney-transplant Waiting list Kidney-transplant What happens Kidney-transplant Living with Kidney-transplant Risks Kidney-transplant Donation Introduction  A kidney transplant is the transfer of a healthy kidney from one person into the body of a person who has little or no kidney function.  The main role of the kidneys is to filter waste products from the blood and convert them to urine. If the kidneys lose this ability, waste products can build up, which is potentially life-threatening. This loss of kidney function, known as end-stage chronic kidney disease or kidney failure, is the most common reason for needing a kidney transplant. It's possible to partially replicate the functions of the kidney using a blood filtering procedure known as dialysis. However, this can be inconvenient and time-consuming, so a kidney transplant is the treatment of choice for kidney failure whenever possible. Who can have a kidney transplant? Most people who need a kidney transplant are able to have one, regardless of their age, as long as: they're well enough to withstand the effects of surgery the transplant has a relatively good chance of success the person is willing to comply with the recommended treatments required after the transplant \u2013 such as taking immunosuppressant medication and attending regular follow-up appointments Reasons why it may not be safe or effective to perform a transplant include having an ongoing infection (this will need to be treated first), severe heart disease, cancer that has spread to several places in your body, or AIDS. Around one in three people with kidney failure is suitable for a transplant. Kidney donations Unlike many other types of organ donation, it's possible to donate a kidney while you're alive because you only need one kidney to survive. This is known as a living donation. People who want to be considered as a kidney donor are tested very carefully to ensure they are a suitable donor and are fit for the operation needed to remove a kidney. Ideally, living donations will come from a close relative because they are more likely to share the same tissue type and blood group as the recipient, which reduces the risk of the body rejecting the kidney. Kidney donations are also possible from people who have recently died. This is known as deceased kidney donation. However, this type of kidney donation has a slightly lower chance of long-term success. Read more about donating a kidney. Waiting for a kidney People who need a kidney transplant, but don't have a suitable living donor, will have to wait until a suitable deceased donor kidney becomes available. On average, the waiting time for a deceased donor kidney transplant is two to three years. Waiting times are so long because the demand for donated kidneys in the UK is far higher than the available supply of donors. From April 2014 to April 2015, around 3,000 kidney transplants were carried out in the UK, but there were still more than 5,000 people on the waiting list for a kidney by the end of this period. Kidney donors are particularly required from people of non-white ethnic origin, because rates of kidney disease are especially high in people of South Asian, African and Caribbean ethnic origin. However, there are not many donors from these communities. Read more about the kidney transplant waiting list. The transplant procedure If you receive a kidney from a living donor, this will be a carefully planned operation. If you're waiting for a deceased donor kidney, the transplant centre will contact you when a suitable kidney becomes available. This can happen at any time of the day or night. Staff at the centre will check you don't have any new medical problems and will ask you to go to the centre, where final checks will be performed to be sure the transplant should go ahead. You'll then have surgery to insert the new kidney and connect it to your blood vessels and bladder. The new kidney will be placed in the lower part of your abdomen (tummy). Your own kidneys will usually be left in place. A kidney transplant is a major surgical procedure with a wide range of potential risks. In the short term, these risks include blood clots and infection. Longer-term problems, which include diabetes and an increased risk of infections, are usually related to the medication you need to take to reduce the chance of rejection. Because of the risk of further problems, people who have had a kidney transplant require regular check-ups for the rest of their life. Read more about what happens during a kidney transplant and the risks of a kidney transplant. Living with a kidney transplant Having a healthy lifestyle after a kidney transplant goes a long way to minimise the risk of complications. Therefore, it\u2019s recommended that you: stop smoking if you smoke eat a healthy diet lose weight if you are overweight or obese take steps to reduce your risk of developing infections Read more about living with a transplant. How long do kidney transplants last? There are a number of factors which affect how long a transplanted kidney lasts. These include whether or not the kidney came from a living donor, how well the kidney is matched in terms of blood group and tissue type, and the age and overall health of the person receiving the donation. Overall, average kidney survival times are: 1 year \u2013 about 95% 5 years \u2013 about 85-90% 10 years \u2013 about 75% If you have a kidney transplant that fails, you can usually be put on the waiting list for another transplant. You may need dialysis in the meantime. The NHS Organ Donor Register In the UK, consent is required before organs can be donated. A person can give their consent to become an organ donor after death by joining the NHS Organ Donor Register or by discussing their wishes with loved ones. Alternatively, a person's organs can be donated if consent is obtained after their death from an authorised person, such as a relative or friend. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick and simple, and will only take a few minutes of your time. You can remove yourself from the register at any time, and you can specify what you're willing to donate. Read more about organ donation. Page last reviewed: 14\/10\/2015 Next review due: 14\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 233 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 146  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Kidney transplant: Tony's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Tony talks about his recovery from a kidney transplant and his goal of climbing Mount Everest. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Dialysis Find kidney disease services Kidney disease Kidney health Organ donation External links British Kidney Patient Association (BKPA) Kidney Patient Guide Kidney Research UK Kidney Transplant Decision Aid National Kidney Federation NHS Organ Donation BBC newsreader donates kidney to save mother BBC news presenter Sabet Choudhury talks about his decision to donate a kidney to save his mother's life Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register Community content from HealthUnlocked Find kidney disease information and support services Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Liver transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Liver-transplant","content":"Liver transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Liver transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Liver-transplant Real stories Liver-transplant Clinical trials Liver-transplant Community Liver transplant Liver-transplant Who can have one Liver-transplant Waiting list Liver-transplant How it's performed Liver-transplant Living with Liver-transplant Complications Introduction  A liver transplant is an operation to remove a diseased or damaged liver and replace it with a healthy one. It's usually recommended when the liver has been damaged to the point that it cannot perform its normal functions. This is known as liver failure or end-stage liver disease. The liver can become gradually damaged as a result of illness, infection or alcohol. This damage causes the liver to become scarred, which is known as cirrhosis. Liver failure can also occur very rapidly as a result of inflammation and death of liver tissue (necrosis). Some of the main causes of liver damage and cirrhosis in the UK are: alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD) \u2013 where the liver becomes scarred because of years of persistent alcohol misuse hepatitis \u2013 blood-borne viruses, including hepatitis B and hepatitis C, that can sometimes cause extensive liver damage primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) \u2013 a poorly understood condition that causes progressive liver damage primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) \u2013 a condition that causes long-lasting inflammation of the liver A liver transplant may also sometimes be recommended as a treatment for liver cancer. The only hope for the long-term survival of a person with liver failure is a liver transplant because \u2013 unlike the kidney, heart or lungs \u2013 there is no device (such as a dialysis machine) that can permanently replicate the functions of the liver. Who can have a liver transplant? There is a strict assessment process that decides who can have a liver transplant, as donated livers are scarce. Under UK regulations, you are usually only considered a suitable candidate if you meet two conditions: without a liver transplant, it is highly likely that your expected lifespan would be shorter than normal, or your quality of life is so poor as to be intolerable  it is expected that you have at least a 50% chance of surviving for at least five years after the transplant with an acceptable quality of life Most people who meet these criteria will be eligible for a transplant, although there are a few situations where you may be considered unsuitable. For example, you may not be able to have a transplant if you are unable to stop misusing alcohol, or you have liver cancer that has spread beyond the liver. A series of tests will need to be carried out to determine whether you are suitable for a liver transplant. Read more about who can have a liver transplant. Types of liver transplant There are three main ways a liver transplant can be carried out: deceased organ donation \u2013 involves transplanting a liver that has been removed from a person who died recently  living donor liver transplant \u2013 a section of liver is removed from a living donor; because the liver can regenerate itself, both the transplanted section and the remaining section of the donor's liver are able to regrow into a normal-sized liver split donation \u2013 a liver is removed from a person who died recently and is split into two pieces; each piece is transplanted into a different person, where they will grow to a normal size Most liver transplants are carried out using livers from deceased donors. Read more about how a liver transplant is performed. Waiting for a liver There are more people in need of a liver transplant than there are donated livers, which means there is a waiting list. The average waiting time for a liver transplant is 145 days for adults and 72 days for children.  While you're on the waiting list, you will need to keep yourself as healthy as possible and be prepared for the transplant centre to contact you at any moment, day or night. You should also keep the transplant centre informed about any changes in your circumstances, such as changes in your health, address or contact details. Read more about being on the liver transplant waiting list. Life after a liver transplant Your symptoms should improve soon after the transplant, but most people will need to stay in hospital for up to two weeks. Recovering from a liver transplant can take a long time, but most people will gradually return to many of their normal activities within a few months. You'll need regular follow-up appointments to monitor your progress and you'll be given immunosuppressant medication that helps to stop your body rejecting your new liver. These usually need to be taken for life. Read more about living with a liver transplant. Risks of a liver transplant The long-term outlook for a liver transplant is generally good. More than nine out of every 10 people are still alive after one year, around eight in every 10 people live at least five years, and many people live for up to 20 years or more. However, a liver transplant is a major operation that carries a risk of some potentially serious complications. These can occur during, soon after, or several years after the procedure. Some of the main problems associated with liver transplants include: your body rejecting the new liver bleeding (haemorrhage) the new liver not working within the first few hours (primary non-function), requiring a new transplant to be carried out as soon as possible an increased risk of picking up infections loss of kidney function problems with blood flow to and from the liver an increased risk of certain types of cancer \u2013 particularly skin cancer There is also a chance that the original condition affecting your old liver will eventually affect your new liver. Read more about the possible complications of a liver transplant. The NHS Organ Donor Register In the UK, consent is required before organs can be donated. A person can give their consent to become an organ donor after death by joining the NHS Organ Donor Register or by discussing their wishes with loved ones. Alternatively, a person\u2019s organs can be donated if consent is obtained after their death from an authorised person, such as a relative or friend. The NHS Organ Donor Register is the same in principle as carrying a donor card, but is a failsafe way of ensuring your wishes are made clear. A donor card can be lost or forgotten about, but joining the register will mean there's a permanent record of your wishes that doctors can check in the event of your death. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick and simple, and will only take a few minutes of your time. You can remove yourself from the register at any time, and you can specify what you're willing to donate.   Read more about organ donation. Page last reviewed: 12\/01\/2015 Next review due: 12\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 181 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Liver transplant: Lorna's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Lorna had a liver transplant in 2009. In this video, she shares her experience of having to wait for the right donor. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol misuse Hepatitis C Liver cancer Living with a long-term condition Organ donation Primary biliary cirrhosis External links British Liver Trust: liver transplantation Children's Liver Disease Foundation Join the NHS donor register NHS Blood and Transplant: organ donation Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lung transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lung-transplant","content":"Lung transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lung transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lung-transplant Real stories Lung-transplant Clinical trials Lung-transplant Community Lung transplant Lung-transplant Preparation Lung-transplant How it is performed Lung-transplant Risks Lung-transplant Recovery   A lung transplant is an operation to remove and replace a diseased lung with a healthy human lung from a donor. A donor is usually a person who's died, but in rare cases a section of lung can be taken from a living donor. Lung transplants aren't carried out frequently in the UK. This is mainly because of the lack of available donors. In England, during 2013-14, 198 lung transplants were carried out. When a lung transplant is needed A lung transplant will often be recommended if: a person has advanced lung disease that isn't responding to other methods of treatment a person's life expectancy is thought to be less than two to three years without a transplant Conditions that can be treated with a lung transplant include: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) \u2013 a general term for a number of conditions that damage the lungs, usually as a result of smoking cystic fibrosis \u2013 an inherited condition that causes the lungs and digestive system to become clogged up with a thick sticky mucus pulmonary hypertension \u2013 high blood pressure in the blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to the lungs idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis \u2013 scarring of the lungs Types of transplant There are three main types of lung transplant: a single lung transplant \u2013 where a single damaged lung is removed from the recipient and replaced with a lung from the donor; this is often used to treat pulmonary fibrosis, but it isn't suitable for people with cystic fibrosis because infection will spread from the remaining lung to the donated lung a double lung transplant \u2013 where both lungs are removed and replaced with two donated lungs; this is usually the main treatment option for people with cystic fibrosis or COPD a heart-lung transplant \u2013 where the heart and both lungs are removed and replaced with a donated heart and lungs; this is often recommended for people with severe pulmonary hypertension The demand for lung transplants is far greater than the available supply of donated lungs. Therefore, a transplant will only be carried out if it's thought there's a relatively good chance of it being successful. For example, a lung transplant wouldn't be recommended for someone with lung cancer because the cancer could reoccur in the donated lungs. You also won't be considered for a lung transplant if you smoke. Living donors It's possible for a person to receive a lung transplant from living donors (two living donors are usually required for one recipient). However, lung transplants from living donors are currently rare in the UK. During this type of lung transplant, the lower lobe of the right lung is removed from one donor, and the lower lobe of the left lung is removed from the other donor. Both lungs are removed from the recipient and replaced with the lung implants from the donors in a single operation. Most people who receive lung transplants from living donors have cystic fibrosis and are close relatives of the donors. The recipient and donors need to be compatible in size and have matching blood groups. Preparation Before being placed on the transplant list you'll need to have some tests to make sure your other major organs, such as your heart, kidneys and liver, will function properly after the transplant. You may also need to make lifestyle changes, such as giving up smoking and losing weight (if you're overweight), so that you're as healthy as possible when it's time for the transplant to take place. Read more about preparing for a lung transplant. The lung transplant procedure A lung transplant usually takes between four and 12 hours to complete, depending on the complexity of the operation. A cut is made in your chest and the damaged lungs removed. Depending on your individual circumstances, you may be connected to a heart and lung bypass machine to keep your blood circulating during the operation. The donated lungs will then be connected to the relevant airways and blood vessels and the chest will be closed. Read more about how a lung transplant is performed. A lung transplant is a major operation that may take at least three months to recover from. It could be quite a while before you're able to return to work so you'll need to make necessary arrangements with your employer. Read more about recovering from a lung transplant. Risks A lung transplant is a complex type of surgery that carries a high risk of complications. A common complication is the immune system rejecting the donated lungs. As a result of this, a medication known as an immunosuppressive is given to dampen the effects of the immune system, reducing the risk of rejection. However, taking immunosuppressives carries its own risks as they increase the chances of infection. Read more about risks associated with a lung transplant. Outlook The outlook for people who've had a lung transplant has improved in recent years and it's expected to continue improving. The British Transplantation Society estimates that around nine out of 10 people survive a lung transplant, with most of these surviving for at least a year after having the operation. About five out of 10 people will survive for at least five years after having a lung transplant, with many people living for at least 10 years. There have also been reports of some people living for 20 years or more after a lung transplant. Although complications can occur at any time, a serious complication is most likely to occur in the first year after the transplant. The NHS Organ Donor Register In the UK, consent (permission) is required before organs can be donated. A person can give their consent by joining the NHS Organ Donor Register or by discussing their wishes with loved ones. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is a failsafe way of ensuring your wishes are made clear. It means there's a permanent record of your wishes that doctors can check in the event of your death. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick, simple, and you can remove yourself from it at any time. Read more about organ donation. Page last reviewed: 28\/06\/2016 Next review due: 28\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 125 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Lung transplant Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A lung transplant is an operation to remove and replace a diseased lung with a healthy human lung from a donor. A donor is usually a person who has died, but in some cases a living donor may be used. In this video, a surgeon explains what lung transplants mean for those who receive them, and the limitations of donor organs. Media last reviewed: 10\/07\/2015 Next review due: 10\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Cystic fibrosis Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Heart-lung transplant Pulmonary fibrosis Pulmonary hypertension External links British Lung Foundation Cystic Fibrosis Trust NHS Blood and Transplant: organ donation NICE guidance:COPD Pulmonary Fibrosis Trust Pulmonary Hypertension Association UK Organ donation Read more about the types of organ donation, how to donate, and which organs can be donated NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pancreas transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pancreastransplant","content":"Pancreas transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pancreas transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pancreastransplant Real stories pancreastransplant Clinical trials Pancreas transplant pancreastransplant Who can have one pancreastransplant Waiting list pancreastransplant What happens pancreastransplant Recovery pancreastransplant Risks   A pancreas transplant is an operation to treat diabetes by replacing the need for insulin with a healthy insulin-producing pancreas from a donor who has recently died. The pancreas is an organ in the abdomen that produces both digestive juices and hormones, such as insulin, that help the body break down food and turn it into energy. A pancreas transplant is sometimes recommended as a treatment for people with insulin-treated diabetes, such as type 1 diabetes, who are unable to produce their own insulin. This page covers: Why they're carried out What happens Recovery Risks Outlook Why pancreas transplants are carried out A pancreas transplant allows people with type 1 diabetes to produce insulin again. It is not a routine treatment because it carries significant risks, and treatment with insulin injections is often effective. A pancreas transplant is usually only considered if: you also have severe kidney disease \u2013 a pancreas transplant may be carried out at the same time as a kidney transplant in these cases you have severe episodes of dangerously low blood sugar levels (hypoglycaemia) that occur without warning and aren't controlled with insulin If your doctor thinks you might benefit from a pancreas transplant, you'll need to have a detailed assessment to check whether you're healthy enough to have one, before being placed on a waiting list. Read more about who can have a pancreas transplant and being on the pancreas transplant waiting list. What happens during a pancreas transplant A pancreas transplant needs to be carried out as soon as possible after a donor pancreas becomes available. The procedure is performed under general anaesthetic, where you're asleep. A cut (incision) is made along your tummy. The donor pancreas \u2013 and donor kidney, if you're having a kidney transplant at the same time \u2013 is then placed inside, and attached to nearby blood vessels and your bowel. The new pancreas should start producing insulin straight away. Your old damaged pancreas will be left in place and will continue to produce important digestive juices after the transplant. Read more about how a pancreas transplant is performed. Recovering from a pancreas transplant You'll usually need to stay in hospital for around two or three weeks after a pancreas transplant. Most people are able to get back to their normal activities within a few months. Your transplant team can give you advice about how long you may need to avoid certain activities during your recovery. You'll need to have regular check-ups with your transplant team after the transplant. You'll also need to take medications called immunosuppressants for the rest of your life. Without these medicines, your body will recognise your new pancreas as foreign and attack it \u2013 this is known as rejection. Read more about recovering from a pancreas transplant. Risks of a pancreas transplant A pancreas transplant is a complex and risky procedure. Possible complications include: the immune system recognising the transplanted pancreas as foreign and attacking it (rejection) blood clots forming in the blood vessels supplying the donor pancreas (thrombosis) short-lived inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), usually just after transplantation side effects from the immunosuppressant medication, such as an increased chance of catching certain infections, developing high blood pressure, and weakened bones (osteoporosis) Many of these problems are treatable, although sometimes it may be necessary to remove the donor pancreas. Read more about the risks associated with a pancreas transplant. Outlook for a pancreas transplant The outlook for people with a pancreas transplant is usually good: most people live for many years, or even decades, after a pancreas transplant \u2013 97% will live at least a year afterwards, and almost 90% will live at least five years for people who had a pancreas and kidney transplant together \u2013 around 85% of donor pancreases are still working after one year, and around 75% are still working after five years for people who just had a pancreas transplant \u2013 around 65% of donor pancreases are still working after one year, and around 45% are still working after five years The donor pancreas can be removed if it stops working, and it may be possible to put you back on the waiting list for another transplant. The NHS Organ Donor Register If you're interested in donating your organs after you die, you can join the NHS Organ Donor Register. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick and simple, and will only take a few minutes of your time. You can remove yourself from the register at any time, and you can specify what you're willing to donate. Page last reviewed: 20\/06\/2016 Next review due: 20\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 41 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Kidney and pancreas double transplant: Ivy's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out how a double kidney and pancreas transplant has transformed former diabetic Ivy's life. Media last reviewed: 04\/02\/2015 Next review due: 04\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Kidney transplant Living with diabetes Organ donation Type 1 diabetes External links NHS Organ Donation Register Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Small bowel transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/small-bowel-transplant","content":"Small bowel transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Small bowel transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview small-bowel-transplant Real stories small-bowel-transplant Clinical trials small-bowel-transplant Small bowel transplant small-bowel-transplant Why it's done small-bowel-transplant Getting ready small-bowel-transplant How it's performed small-bowel-transplant Recovery small-bowel-transplant Risks Introduction  A small bowel (intestinal) transplant is an operation to replace a diseased or shortened small bowel with a healthy bowel from a donor. It is a complicated and highly specialised operation that is not commonly performed, although the number of procedures carried out has increased in recent years. Currently, around 15-20 small bowel transplants are performed each year in the UK. These procedures are carried out at four specialist centres \u2013 Birmingham Children\u2019s Hospital, Addenbrooke\u2019s Hospital in Cambridge, John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford and King's College Hospital in London. Why small bowel transplants are carried out A small bowel transplant is an option for children and adults whose bowel has stopped working properly and who are being fed by total parenteral nutrition (TPN). This is where a person requires all their nutrition to be given through a drip into a vein because their bowel is unable to absorb nutrients from any food they eat. While many people needing TPN can have this treatment at home without experiencing any significant problems, the long-term use of TPN can lead to serious complications such as liver disease and repeated infections. A small bowel transplant may be considered when the person has a serious problem with their bowel, but has developed complications from TPN or is unable to tolerate this form of feeding. Read more about when a small bowel transplant is needed. Getting ready Before having a small bowel transplant, you will need a transplant assessment. This involves tests and conversations with a transplant team to check if you are suitable for the procedure. If you are suitable, you will be placed on a national waiting list until suitable organs from a recently deceased donor become available. You may be contacted at any time by the transplant team, day or night. How long you have to wait will depend on your blood group, the availability of donors and how many urgent cases are on the list. On average, people wait just under six months for a small bowel transplant. In some cases, it may be possible for a family member to donate a section of their bowel for transplantation, without you needing to be placed on the waiting list. Read more about preparing for a small bowel transplant. The operation A small bowel transplant is a complicated and difficult operation that takes, on average, around 8-10 hours and is carried out under general anaesthetic. During the procedure, the surgeon will remove the bowel and connect the transplanted bowel to your blood vessels and digestive tract. They will also form an ileostomy, where part of the small bowel is diverted through an opening in the tummy, called a stoma. The stoma will allow digestive waste to pass out of your body into an external pouch, and lets the transplant team easily assess the health of your transplanted bowel. Although it is not always possible, the ileostomy may be reversed a few months later. Read more about how a small bowel transplant is performed. After the operation Recovering from a small bowel transplant can take a long time, and you'll probably need to stay in hospital for at least four to six weeks. While in hospital, you will receive medication to reduce the risk of your body rejecting the new organ; these are known as immunosuppressants. You will be slowly weaned from TPN to eating a normal diet. After leaving hospital, you'll need to continue taking immunosuppressant medication and have regular check-ups for the rest of your life. Read more about recovering from a small bowel transplant. Outlook Although medication and regular check-ups will be needed indefinitely, a small bowel transplant can allow you to live as normal a life as possible \u2013 including working, enjoying hobbies and living independently. However, due to the risks of surgery and the general poor health of people who are considered for a small bowel transplant, some people will die within a few years of their operation. Current figures for transplants carried out in the UK between January 1998 and December 2013 show that: after 90 days \u2013 84% of adults and 88% of children are still alive after one year \u2013 76% of adults and 72% of children are still alive after five years \u2013 62% of adults and 51% of children are still alive However, the outlook for small bowel transplants carried out now is likely to be better than these figures suggest, as medical knowledge and techniques are constantly improving. Read more about the risks of a small bowel transplant. Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Page last reviewed: 23\/06\/2014 Next review due: 23\/06\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 16 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Organ donation Ileostomy Donation issues Can my organs be removed after I die? External links Intestinal Transplantation (UK) The Harry Matthews Bowel Transplant Trust Transplant Kids NHSBT: becoming an organ donor 'My day as a transplant co-ordinator' Transplant co-ordinator Jen Lumsdaine describes her typical day, and how organ donors are matched with a recipient Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Orthodontics","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Orthodontics","content":"Orthodontics - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Orthodontics  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Orthodontics Clinical trials Orthodontics Orthodontics When it is used Orthodontics Accessing orthodontics Orthodontics How it is performed Introduction  Orthodontic treatment is used to improve the appearance, position and function of crooked or abnormally arranged teeth. Orthodontic treatment can straighten the teeth and move them into a better position.   Healthcare professionals specialising in orthodontics are known as orthodontists. You can find a list of all specialist orthodontists registered in the UK on the General Dental Council (GDC) website. What does orthodontic treatment involve? Orthodontics uses devices such as a brace to correct the position of the teeth. Your exact treatment will depend on the problems with your teeth. In some cases, you may have to wear headgear at night as well as a brace, and you may also need to have some teeth removed as part of your treatment. The length of treatment will depend on how complicated the problem is, but it's usually between 18 and 24 months.  Read more about the types of orthodontic treatment. Who needs orthodontic treatment? Many people have crowded or crooked teeth, or their teeth don't meet correctly when they bite. These problems can mean the teeth are more likely to become damaged or put a strain on jaw muscles.   In some cases, abnormal development of the teeth and jaw can affect the shape of the face. Problems with crooked and out-of-place teeth are quite common in the UK. It's thought around a third of 12-year-olds would benefit from some degree of orthodontic treatment. Read more about when orthodontic treatment is used. How can I access orthodontic treatment? In most cases, you or your child will be referred to an orthodontist by your dentist, although you may be able to seek treatment directly. If orthodontic treatment is recommended, you may have to decide whether to have treatment privately or on the NHS. NHS orthodontic treatment is free for people under the age of 18 with a clear clinical need for treatment. However, because of the high demand for treatment, there can be a long waiting list for NHS orthodontic treatment. If you don't qualify for free NHS treatment, or you don't want to wait for treatment to start, you may choose to have private treatment. Private treatment is widely available but can be expensive, with an average fee of between £2,000 and £6,000. Read more about accessing orthodontic treatment. Keeping your braces clean A common complication of orthodontics is tooth decay. Your mouth is full of bacteria that combine with small food particles and saliva to form a sticky film known as plaque. which leads to plaque and causes the enamel to decay. Many people with appliances find it difficult to keep their teeth clean, so additional brushing is essential during treatment. To reduce your risk of enamel decay, your orthodontist may recommend using toothpaste with high levels of fluoride or a mouthwash that contains fluoride. You should also try to avoid sugary foods and fizzy drinks. Read more about how to maintain good dental health. Page last reviewed: 11\/12\/2014 Next review due: 11\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 242 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Braces Dental health Find a dentist near you External links British Dental Association: fixed braces British Dental Association: retainers British Orthodontic Society: find orthodontic treatment Dental Health Foundation: orthodontic treatment Braces Find out how braces can improve your smile, plus how to get treatment on the NHS Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening Find and choose services for Orthodontics Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Orthopaedics (orthopaedic surgery)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/orthopaedics","content":"Trauma and orthopaedics (orthopaedic surgery) Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trauma and orthopaedics (orthopaedic surgery)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trauma and orthopaedics (orthopaedic surgery) Introduction  Trauma and orthopaedics is an area of surgery concerned with injuries and conditions that affect the musculoskeletal system (the bones, joints, ligaments, tendons, muscles and nerves). You may be referred to a trauma and orthopaedic consultant for treatment of an injury such as a bone fracture, a deformity of the spine or limbs, or a long-term condition that's developed over many years, such as osteoarthritis. Orthopaedic specialists treat people of all ages, including: newborns and children with deformities \u2013 such as congenital dislocation of the hip, club foot and scoliosis young people who need joint preserving surgery \u2013 such as arthroscopic surgery or osteotomy (see below) older people with irreversible degenerative joint problems \u2013 who need their joints replacing Orthopaedic specialists Most consultants who work in trauma and orthopaedics provide emergency and non-emergency care for musculoskeletal injuries following an initial assessment in accident and emergency (A&E). They may: diagnose injuries or disorders using X-rays, blood tests or other tests treat injuries or conditions with medication or surgery recommend exercises or physiotherapy to restore movement, strength and functionality Most orthopaedic consultants also have a specialist interest. This may be a particular orthopaedic condition, a specific area of the body, or a field such as paediatrics or sport surgery. Orthopaedic operations Some of the most common operations orthopaedic surgeons carry out include: repairing fractured bones \u2013 for more information, you can read about: - broken arm or wrist - broken ankle - broken collarbone - broken hip - broken leg - broken ribs arthroscopy \u2013 a minimally invasive (keyhole) technique, where tools are inserted into a joint to diagnose and repair damaged joint tissue, such as cartilage damage repairing damaged muscles, torn tendons or torn ligaments  arthroplasty \u2013 surgery used to replace or resurface joints, usually because of arthritis; hip replacements and knee replacements are two widely used and highly effective operations surgery to correct bony deformity \u2013 procedures to correct deformities of the spine or limbs that either limit function or would cause long-term problems if left untreated. Examples are fusion surgery (where bones are welded together to heal into a single, solid bone) and osteotomy (correcting a bony malalignment to help prevent degeneration of an adjacent joint)  The above links will take you to more detailed information about these conditions and procedures. Page last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 46 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthroscopy Cartilage damage Healthy bones Hip replacement Knee replacement Osteoarthritis External links British Orthopaedic Association: patient information National Joint Registry: joint replacements Hip replacement A hip replacement is a common type of surgery where a damaged hip joint is replaced with an artificial one Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"OSA (obstructive sleep apnoea)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Sleep-apnoea","content":"Obstructive sleep apnoea - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Obstructive sleep apnoea  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Sleep-apnoea Real stories Sleep-apnoea Clinical trials Sleep-apnoea Community Obstructive sleep apnoea Sleep-apnoea Diagnosis Sleep-apnoea Treatment   Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is a relatively common condition where the walls of the throat relax and narrow during sleep, interrupting normal breathing. This may lead to regularly interrupted sleep, which can have a big impact on quality of life and increases the risk of developing certain conditions. This topic covers: Apnoea and hypopnoea Symptoms When to seek medical advice Causes Treatments Complications Prevention Apnoea and hypopnoea There are two types of breathing interruption characteristic of OSA: apnoea \u2013 where the muscles and soft tissues in the throat relax and collapse sufficiently to cause a total blockage of the airway; it's called an apnoea when the airflow is blocked for 10 seconds or more hypopnoea \u2013 a partial blockage of the airway that results in an airflow reduction of greater than 50% for 10 seconds or more People with OSA may experience repeated episodes of apnoea and hypopnoea throughout the night. These events may occur around once every one or two minutes in severe cases. As many people with OSA experience episodes of both apnoea and hypopnoea, doctors sometimes refer to the condition as obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea syndrome, or OSAHS. The term \"obstructive\" distinguishes OSA from rarer forms of sleep apnoea, such as central sleep apnoea, which is caused by the brain not sending signals to the breathing muscles during sleep. Symptoms of OSA The symptoms of OSA are often first spotted by a partner, friend or family member who notices problems while you sleep. Signs of OSA in someone sleeping can include: loud snoring noisy and laboured breathing repeated short periods where breathing is interrupted by gasping or snorting Some people with OSA may also experience night sweats and may wake up frequently during the night to urinate. During an episode, the lack of oxygen triggers your brain to pull you out of deep sleep \u2013 either to a lighter sleep or to wakefulness \u2013 so your airway reopens and you can breathe normally. These repeated sleep interruptions can make you feel very tired during the day. You'll usually have no memory of your interrupted breathing, so you may be unaware you have a problem. When to seek medical advice See your GP if you think you might have OSA. They can check for other possible reasons for your symptoms and can arrange for an assessment of your sleep to be carried out through a local sleep centre. As someone with OSA may not notice they have the condition, it often goes undiagnosed. Read more about diagnosing OSA. Causes of OSA It's normal for the muscles and soft tissues in the throat to relax and collapse to some degree while sleeping. For most people this doesn't cause breathing problems. In people with OSA the airway has narrowed as the result of a number of factors, including: being overweight \u2013 excessive body fat increases the bulk of soft tissue in the neck, which can place a strain on the throat muscles; excess stomach fat can also lead to breathing difficulties, which can make OSA worse being male \u2013 it's not known why OSA is more common in men than in women, but it may be related to different patterns of body fat distribution being 40 years of age or more \u2013 although OSA can occur at any age, it's more common in people who are over 40 having a large neck \u2013 men with a collar size greater than around 43cm (17 inches) have an increased risk of developing OSA taking medicines with a sedative effect \u2013 such as sleeping tablets or tranquillisers having an unusual inner neck structure \u2013 such as a narrow airway, large tonsils, adenoids or tongue, or a small lower jaw alcohol \u2013 drinking alcohol, particularly before going to sleep, can make snoring and sleep apnoea worse smoking \u2013 you're more likely to develop sleep apnoea if you smoke the menopause (in women) \u2013 the changes in hormone levels during the menopause may cause the throat muscles to relax more than usual having a family history of OSA \u2013 there may be genes inherited from your parents that can make you more susceptible to OSA nasal congestion \u2013 OSA occurs more often in people with nasal congestion, such as a deviated septum, where the tissue in the nose that divides the two nostrils is bent to one side, or nasal polyps, which may be a result of the airways being narrowed Treating OSA OSA is a treatable condition, and there are a variety of treatment options that can reduce the symptoms. Treatment options for OSA include: lifestyle changes \u2013 such as losing excess weight, cutting down on alcohol and sleeping on your side using a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device \u2013 these devices prevent your airway closing while you sleep by delivering a continuous supply of compressed air through a mask wearing a mandibular advancement device (MAD) \u2013 this gum shield-like device fits around your teeth, holding your jaw and tongue forward to increase the space at the back of your throat while you sleep Surgery may also be an option if OSA is thought to be the result of a physical problem that can be corrected surgically, such as an unusual inner neck structure. However, for most people surgery isn't appropriate and may only be considered as a last resort if other treatments haven't helped. Read more about treating OSA. Complications of OSA The treatments mentioned above can often help control the symptoms of OSA, although treatment will need to be lifelong in most cases. If OSA is left untreated, it can have a significant impact on your quality of life, causing problems such as poor performance at work and school, and placing a strain on your relationships with others. Poorly controlled OSA may also increase your risk of: developing high blood pressure (hypertension) having a stroke or heart attack developing an irregular heartbeat \u2013 such as atrial fibrillation developing type 2 diabetes \u2013 although it's unclear if this is the result of an underlying cause, such as obesity Research has shown someone who has been deprived of sleep because of OSA may be up to 12 times more likely to be involved in a car accident. If you're diagnosed with OSA, it may mean your ability to drive is affected. It's your legal obligation to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) about a medical condition that could have an impact on your driving ability. Once a diagnosis of OSA has been made, you shouldn't drive until your symptoms are well controlled. The GOV.UK website has advice about how to tell the DVLA about a medical condition. Preventing OSA It's not always possible to prevent OSA, but making certain lifestyle changes may reduce your risk of developing the condition. These include: losing weight if you're overweight or obese limiting how much alcohol you drink and avoiding alcohol in the evening stopping smoking if you smoke avoiding the use of sleeping tablets and tranquillisers Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/07\/2016 Next review due: 14\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 555 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 274  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 161  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Snoring and sleep apnoea Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An expert explains the difference between snoring and sleep apnoea, and people talk about the methods they've used to get a good night's sleep. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links High blood pressure Obesity Snoring Snoring advice Tiredness and fatigue External links British Lung Foundation: OSA British Society of Dental Sleep Medicine GOV.UK: driving and medical conditions Sleep Apnoea Trust Do you have sleep apnoea? Snoring can often be a symptom of a more serious sleeping disorder called sleep apnoea NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Osgood-Schlatter's disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/knee-pain\/Pages\/Introduction.aspx#Osgood","content":"Knee pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Knee pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview knee-pain Clinical trials Knee pain Introduction  Sudden pain in one of the knees is usually the result of overusing the knee or injuring it. In many cases, you don't need to see your GP. The knee joint is particularly vulnerable to damage and pain because it takes the full weight of your body and any extra force when you run or jump. You're more likely to experience knee pain as you get older, and people who are overweight or do lots of sports have a higher risk of damaging their knees. Some sports that involve a lot of turning, such as football, netball and skiing, carry a particularly high risk of knee injuries. This page summarises some of the most common causes of pain in one or both knees, and offers advice on when you should see your GP. Common causes of knee pain Common causes of knee pain include: sprains and strains anterior knee pain (pain around the kneecap) menisci or cartilage damage osteoarthritis tendonitis bursitis (housemaid's knee) torn ligaments or tendons bleeding into the joint Osgood-Schlatter's disease gout septic arthritis (infected knee joint) Click on these links for more information about these conditions. Simple sprain or strain If you think your pain is the result of having done more activity than you're used to, you've probably just sprained or strained your knee. This means that the knee tissues have stretched, but aren't permanently damaged. Read more about sprains and strains. Most sprains and strains can be managed yourself using PRICE therapy (protection, rest, ice, compression and elevation) and painkillers. Read more about treating sprains and strains. You can prevent future injuries by: always warming up before exercising and stretching to cool down after exercise increasing your activity levels slowly over time replacing your sports shoes when necessary You can also try low-impact exercises, such as cycling and swimming, to improve your health and fitness without harming your knees. Read about easy exercises. Anterior knee pain Knee pain felt at the front of the knee, around the kneecap, is called anterior knee pain or patellofemoral pain syndrome. It's not always obvious why this pain develops, but it's been linked to previous injuries, overuse of your knees, muscle weakness and your kneecap being slightly out of place. The pain tends to be dull or aching and often affects both knees at the same time. It's usually made worse by sitting for prolonged periods, squatting or kneeling, or using stairs. You can normally treat this yourself using ordinary painkillers, an ice pack and rest. Exercises to strengthen the muscles around your kneecap can also help. You may be referred to a physiotherapist, who can advise you about specific exercises to try. Damage to the menisci or cartilage Sitting between the upper and lower leg bones at the knee joint are rubbery pads of tissue called menisci. These cushion the bones, acting as shock absorbers. A meniscus can also be torn after suddenly twisting the knee joint, resulting in pain, swelling and occasionally locking of the knee. Rarely, the torn meniscus can flip into the joint and prevent you from straightening it. A meniscus can also be torn after suddenly twisting the knee joint, resulting in pain, swelling and occasionally locking of the knee. The cartilage covering the bones of the knee joint can also be damaged by injury (read more about cartilage damage). These symptoms may settle down with rest, although physiotherapy can sometimes help, and in the case of menisci damage, an operation may be needed to remove or repair the torn pad of tissue. Osteoarthritis In older people, recurrent pain and stiffness in both knees is likely to be caused by osteoarthritis, the most common type of arthritis in the UK. Osteoarthritis causes damage to the articular cartilage (protective surface of the knee bone) and mild swelling of the tissues in and around the joints. The pain in your joints may be worse after putting weight on your knees and your knees may become stiff if you don't move them for a while. They may also occasionally become locked or feel as though they're going to give way. In some cases, osteoarthritis can also cause a painful fluid-filled swelling to develop at the back of the knee \u2013 this is known as a Baker\u2019s cyst, or popliteal cyst. Less commonly, osteoarthritis can affect younger people, especially those who are overweight or have had serious injuries to the knee in the past. You should see your GP if you think your knee pain may be caused by osteoarthritis. They may recommend wearing suitable footwear to reduce the strain on your joints, using assistive devices such as a walking stick, losing weight, taking painkillers, or having physiotherapy. Read more about treating osteoarthritis. Tendonitis Overusing or injuring the tendon that connects the kneecap to the shin bone can cause patellar tendonitis (inflammation of the tendon). This condition is sometimes called \"jumper's knee\", as it can be brought on by jumping activities such as basketball or volleyball. As well as feeling painful and tender, your knee may also be swollen, red and warm. The pain can often be relieved with rest, ice packs and painkillers at home. Read more about treating tendonitis.  Bursitis Repetitive movement of the knee or kneeling for long periods can cause a build-up of fluid over the knee joint, known as bursitis or \"housemaid's knee\". This particularly affects people with certain jobs that involve kneeling (such as carpet layers), or sports players (such as footballers). It typically causes pain in the knee that gets worse when you kneel or bend your knee fully. Your knee will also probably be swollen and may be tender, red and warm. Bursitis can often be treated at home. Resting the affected area and using an ice pack helps reduce the swelling and ordinary painkillers can help relieve the pain until your knee heals. Read more about treating bursitis. If you develop redness that spreads, a high temperature (fever), or persistent pain, this may be due to infection of the bursae. You should see your GP urgently, or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department. Torn ligament or tendon Knee pain may be caused by torn ligaments or tendons. Ligaments are tough bands of tissue that connect the bones at the knee joint; tendons connect the muscles to the bone. You can tear these tissues during running sports such as rugby or football. Injured tendons or knee ligaments at the side of the knee may cause pain even when the knee is at rest, which may get worse when you bend the knee or put weight on it. There may also be warmth and swelling around the knee. If you feel that your knee is also unstable or keeps \"giving way\", you may have torn the anterior cruciate ligament (one of the main knee ligaments). This probably resulted from a sudden change in direction or a twisting movement, and you may have heard a pop when it happened.  You should see your GP if this happens, and you may be referred to an orthopaedic specialist for advice and treatment. In some cases, surgery may be recommended. Read about surgery to repair a damaged knee ligament. Bleeding into the joint An injury that causes significant damage to the knee joint may cause bleeding into the joint spaces, known as haemarthrosis. This can happen if a cruciate ligament is torn or if there is a fracture to one of the bones of the knee. Signs of haemarthrosis are swelling of the knee, warmth, stiffness and bruising. You should go to hospital immediately to have your knee treated if you have a badly swollen knee. Surgery may be required to repair the damage. If you take anticoagulant medication such as warfarin, bleeding into the joint can happen without any obvious damage. You should see your GP in this case as you may need treatment to reverse the effects on your medication. Osgood-Schlatter's disease In teenagers and young adults, pain, swelling and tenderness in the bony lump just below the kneecap could be a sign of Osgood-Schlatter's disease.  This is a where the bone at the top of the lower leg becomes damaged during a growth spurt. It's relatively common in active children who participate in sports that involve running, jumping and repetitive bending on the knees. Reducing activity levels, taking painkillers and using ice packs can help relieve the pain in most children. The problem will normally resolve completely once your child stops having growth spurts, although occasionally it can persist into adulthood. Gout If you experience sudden attacks of severe knee pain and your knee also becomes red and hot, the cause is likely to be gout, which is a type of arthritis. Gout is caused by a build-up of uric acid (a waste product) in the body, which can form crystals in the joints. These crystals cause the joints to become inflamed and painful. Gout will cause severe pain in the knee and limit movement of the joint. You may feel pain even when you're resting, including at night. Gout can affect any joint in the body and sometimes other joints such as the joint of your big toe may be affected before your knees. You should see your GP if you think the cause of your knee pain is gout. They may recommend using ice packs and taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) painkillers. You may also need to change your diet or receive additional treatment to prevent attacks if you experience them frequently. Read more about treating gout. Septic arthritis (infected knee) Septic arthritis is a serious condition that causes a very painful, hot, swollen knee. You may also feel generally unwell and have a fever. It can be mistaken for gout (see above). You should see your GP urgently, or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if you suspect you have septic arthritis. Septic arthritis is treated by draining fluid from the knee before antibiotics are given. Occasionally arthroscopic surgery is needed to clear out the infection. When to see your GP You should see your GP if: you cannot put weight on your knee at all you have severe pain even when you're not putting weight on it, such as at night your knee locks or painfully clicks (painless clicking is OK) your knee keeps giving way you're unable to fully bend or straighten your knee your knee looks deformed you have fever, redness or heat around the knee, or it's very swollen you have pain, swelling, numbness or tingling of the calf beneath your affected knee the pain doesn't start to improve within a few weeks or you have pain that's still severe after a few days of caring for your knee at home Your GP will do a careful examination of the knee and take your medical history. They may also arrange further tests such as blood tests, an X-ray or a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan to help identify the problem. In some cases, you may need to be referred to an orthopaedic specialist. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/03\/2015 Next review due: 27\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2027 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 939  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 600  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 148  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 101  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 239  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Common running injuries Dislocated kneecap Osteoarthritis Shin pain Sports injuries Sprains and strains External links Arthritis Research UK: knee arthritis The Pain Toolkit Pain Concern Knee pain and other running injuries The five most common running injuries, what to do if you get one, plus how to prevent injury Knee exercises for runners Knee exercises to help you run better, run pain-free and avoid knee pain Life with osteoarthritis Kathleen Smith describes life with osteoarthritis and how swimming helps with the pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/hereditary-hemorrhagic-telangiectasia","content":"Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Introduction  Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an inherited genetic disorder that affects the blood vessels. It's sometimes spelt hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia and is also known as Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome. Typical symptoms are persistent nosebleeds and visible red spots in certain places on the body \u2013 typically on the fingertip pads, on the lips and tongue, and on mucous membranes such as the lining of the nose and gut (see What are the symptoms?). It affects about 1 in 5,000 people. What happens in HHT? In HHT, some of the blood vessels do not develop properly. Normally, the arteries branch off into smaller and smaller blood vessels until they reach a network of capillaries (tiny blood vessels) that feed the body tissues and organs. Blood pressure drops in this network of capillaries, before the blood flows on into veins and back to the heart. In HHT, some of the blood vessels from the arteries join directly with the veins. These abnormal connections are called arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). When AVMs occur in small vessels near the surface of the skin, where they are visible as red spots, they are known as telangiectasia. When they form in the lining of the nose or the gut, they can easily bleed. Frequent bleeding can lead to anaemia, and sometimes more serious problems (see What are the symptoms?). What causes HHT?  Someone with HHT will have a faulty gene (genetic mutation) and, usually, this will have been inherited from one of their parents. This gene normally provides instructions for making certain proteins found in the lining of the blood vessels. In HHT, the gene cannot produce this protein, or the protein it produces is abnormal. You only need to have one copy of the faulty gene to develop HHT. What are the symptoms? Symptoms usually start in childhood or in the teenage years. Nosebleeds Often, the first sign is developing nosebleeds. They can start at any age, often in childhood. Nosebleeds may be frequent and persistent, but can improve with age. They happen because of the abnormal blood vessels in the lining of the nose. The loss of blood can lead to iron-deficiency anaemia, if the iron is not replaced through the diet and with iron supplements. Red or purple spots under the skin (telangiectasia) From about 20-30 years old (sometimes earlier), abnormal blood vessels \u2013 telangiectasia \u2013 may start to appear just underneath the skin, which show as red or purple spots. Telangiectasia typically form on the fingertip pads, the lips, and the lining of the nose or the gut. Sometimes, they can form on the ears and face. They tend to increase in number with age. They're usually just a cosmetic problem, although they may sometimes bleed. Abnormal blood vessels (AVMs) inside the body  Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) can form inside the body organs and tissues. Many people with AVMs won't experience any symptoms, and are not even aware they have them. They can cause preventable complications, but most people live well with their AVMs. Decisions to treat AVMs are based on the safety of the treatment versus the risks of leaving the AVM untreated. Some AVMs are worth treating, and some are better left alone. AVMs in the lungs (pulmonary AVMs) often lead to low blood oxygen levels, and can allow blood clots to pass through to the brain, which could result in a stroke. They can occasionally bleed, but this is not very common outside of pregnancy. There are safe treatments available and these are usually recommended when pulmonary AVMs are found. AVMs in the brain usually cause no symptoms, although they can irritate the surrounding brain tissue and cause seizures or headaches. They can also bleed, leading to a stroke, but whether they should be treated if they have not bled remains controversial. AVMs in other parts of the body usually cause no symptoms. How is HHT treated? There's no cure for HHT, but there are effective treatments and life expectancy is usually very good. Some patients can be managed by their GP, and some will need to be under the care of a specialist. Because there are increased risks during pregnancy for women with HHT (such as a slight increased risk of a major bleed or a stroke), it is recommended that if HHT is in the family, this is brought to the attention of the specialist in charge of the woman's care. Iron supplements Patients who have regular nosebleeds will probably lose a lot of iron through this loss of blood, especially if they also bleed from telangiectasia in the gut. It is important to replace the lost iron with iron supplements \u2013 dietary changes alone may not be enough. Read about the importance of iron and the treatment of anaemia with iron supplements and iron-rich food. Treatment of nosebleeds Those with severe nosebleeds may need emergency nasal packing, where the nose is packed with ribbon gauze or a special nasal sponge.  Some people may need to see an ear, nose and throat specialist for treatment. Laser therapy may help (see below). More severe cases may respond to skin grafting or other surgery. Blood transfusion after loss of blood If a lot of blood has been lost from bleeding inside the body or after nosebleeds, a blood transfusion may be needed. Read about blood transfusions. Laser treatment for telangiectasia Telangiectasia on the skin or in the lining of the nose can sometimes be improved with vascular laser or intense pulsed light (IPL) treatment. For the skin, a referral to a dermatologist is usually needed. Around two to four treatments a year may be needed, so the overall cost may be significant if the treatment is not available on the NHS. For the nose, a referral to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist is needed, and these treatments are usually available on the NHS. Laser and IPL machines produce narrow beams of light aimed at the visible blood vessels in the skin. The heat from the lasers damages the dilated veins and causes them to shrink so they are no longer visible, with minimal scarring or damage to the surrounding area. Laser treatment can cause pain, but most people do not need an anaesthetic. Treating AVMs inside the body AVMs in the body may require specialist treatment. Your HHT specialist will explain any procedures to you in more detail. For example, AVMs in the lung are usually treated, even if they are not causing any apparent problems. They are treated by embolisation, a procedure that blocks the blood supply to the AVM. A tiny plug is inserted inside the artery supplying the abnormal blood vessel. Embolisation has virtually replaced open surgery, and is normally carried out under sedation (which will help relax you during the procedure). For brain AVMs, embolisation, surgery and stereotactic radiotherapy (precisely delivering radiation to the blood vessel) are possible treatment options. Liver AVMs may require different types of specialist treatments. However, these treatments aren't always appropriate. Your specialist will explain why many AVMs, such as those in the liver and in the brain, may be better left alone, as the risks of invasive treatments may outweigh the potential benefits. Information about you If you have HHT, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 24\/02\/2015 Next review due: 24\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 49 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Importance of iron Treatment of anaemia External links Imperial College London: HHT and PAVMs Telangiectasia Self Help Group HHT UK NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Osteoarthritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Osteoarthritis","content":"Osteoarthritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Osteoarthritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Osteoarthritis Clinical trials Osteoarthritis Community Osteoarthritis Osteoarthritis Symptoms Osteoarthritis Treatment Osteoarthritis Living with   Osteoarthritis is a condition that causes joints to become painful and stiff. It's the most common type of arthritis in the UK. This topic covers: Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Treatment Living with osteoarthritis Prevention Symptoms of osteoarthritis The main symptoms of osteoarthritis are joint pain and stiffness. Some people also experience swelling, tenderness and a grating or crackling sound when moving the affected joints. The severity of osteoarthritis symptoms can vary greatly from person to person, and between different affected joints. For some people, the symptoms can be mild and may come and go. Other people can experience more continuous and severe problems which make it difficult to carry out everyday activities. Almost any joint can be affected by osteoarthritis, but the condition most often causes problems in the knees, hips and small joints of the hands. You should see your GP if you have persistent symptoms of osteoarthritis so they can confirm the diagnosis and prescribe any necessary treatment. Read more about the symptoms of osteoarthritis. Causes of osteoarthritis As part of normal life, your joints are exposed to a constant low level of damage. In most cases, your body repairs the damage itself and you don't experience any symptoms. But in osteoarthritis, the protective cartilage on the ends of your bones breaks down, causing pain, swelling and problems moving the joint. Bony growths can develop, and the area can become inflamed (red and swollen). The exact cause isn't known, but several things are thought to increase your risk of developing osteoarthritis, including: joint injury \u2013 overusing your joint when it hasn't had enough time to heal after an injury or operation other conditions (secondary arthritis) \u2013 osteoarthritis can occur in joints severely damaged by a previous or existing condition, such as rheumatoid arthritis or gout age \u2013 your risk of developing the condition increases as you get older family history \u2013 osteoarthritis may run in families, although studies haven't identified a single gene responsible obesity \u2013 being obese puts excess strain on your joints, particularly those that bear most of your weight, such as your knees and hips Diagnosing osteoarthritis To help determine whether you have osteoarthritis, your GP will first ask you about your symptoms and examine your joints. Your GP may suspect osteoarthritis if: you're aged 50 or older you have joint pain that gets worse the more you use your joints you have stiffness in your joints in the morning that lasts less than 30 minutes, or no stiffness at all If your symptoms are slightly different from those listed above, this may indicate another joint condition. For example, prolonged joint stiffness in the morning can be a sign of rheumatoid arthritis. Further tests \u2013 such as X-rays or blood tests \u2013 aren't usually necessary, but may be used to rule out other possible causes, such as rheumatoid arthritis or a fractured bone. Treating osteoarthritis Osteoarthritis is a long-term condition and can't be cured, but it doesn't necessarily get any worse over time and it can sometimes gradually improve. A number of treatments are also available to reduce the symptoms. Mild symptoms can sometimes be managed with simple measures including: regular exercise losing weight if you're overweight wearing suitable footwear using special devices to reduce the strain on your joints during your everyday activities If your symptoms are more severe, you may need additional treatments such as painkilling medication and a structured exercise plan carried out under the supervision of a physiotherapist. In a small number of cases, where the above treatments haven't helped or the damage to the joints is particularly severe, surgery may be carried out to repair, strengthen or replace a damaged joint. Read more about treating osteoarthritis. Living with osteoarthritis As osteoarthritis is a long-term condition, it's important you receive support to help you cope with any issues such as reduced mobility, and advice on any necessary financial support. Some people may find it helpful to talk to their GP or others who are living with osteoarthritis, as there may be questions or worries you want to share. Read about living with osteoarthritis. Preventing osteoarthritis It's not possible to prevent osteoarthritis altogether. However, you may be able to minimise your risk of developing the condition by avoiding injury and staying as healthy as possible. Exercise Avoid exercise that puts strain on your joints and forces them to bear an excessive load, such as running and weight training. Instead, try exercises such as swimming and cycling, where your joints are better supported and the strain on your joints is more controlled. Try to do at least 150 minutes (2 hours and 30 minutes) of moderate-intensity aerobic activity (such as cycling or fast walking) every week to build up your muscle strength and keep yourself generally healthy. Read about health and fitness \u2013 including tips on simple exercises you can do at home. Posture It can also help to maintain good posture at all times and avoid staying in the same position for too long. If you work at a desk, make sure your chair is at the correct height, and take regular breaks to move around. Read about common posture mistakes and fixes. Losing weight Being overweight or obese can increase the strain on your joints and increase your risk of developing osteoarthritis. If you're overweight, losing weight may help lower your chances of developing the condition. To find out whether you're overweight or obese, use the healthy weight calculator. Read more about losing weight. Want to know more? Arthritis Care: taking care of joints Arthritis Research UK: exercise and arthritis Arthritis Research UK: diet and arthritis Osteoarthritis: Elaine's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. According to Elaine: \"Your brain is the best painkiller you've got.\" She talks about her experience of osteoarthritis and how she manages the condition. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Page last reviewed: 04\/08\/2016 Next review due: 04\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1215 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 354  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 342  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 200  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 226  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis Hip replacement Knee replacement Care and support Healthy weight calculator External links Arthritis Research UK: osteoarthritis Arthritis Care: osteoarthritis Pain Concern The Pain Toolkit NICE: osteoarthritis Osteoarthritis of the Hip Decision Aid Osteoarthritis of the Knee Decision Aid Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain Life with osteoarthritis Kathleen Smith describes life with osteoarthritis and how swimming helps with the pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Osteomalacia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rickets","content":"Rickets and osteomalacia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rickets and osteomalacia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rickets Clinical trials Rickets Rickets Symptoms Rickets Causes Rickets Treatment Rickets Prevention Introduction  Rickets is a condition that affects bone development in children. It causes the bones to become soft and weak, which can lead to bone deformities. Rickets in adults is known as osteomalacia or soft bones. Rickets can cause bone pain, poor growth and deformities of the skeleton, such as bowed legs, curvature of the spine, and thickening of the ankles, wrists and knees. Children with rickets are also more likely to fracture their bones. Read more about the signs and symptoms of rickets. What causes rickets? A lack of vitamin D or calcium is the most common cause of rickets. Vitamin D largely comes from exposing the skin to sunlight, but it's also found in some foods, such as oily fish and eggs. Vitamin D is essential for the formation of strong and healthy bones in children. In rare cases, children can be born with a genetic form of rickets. It can also develop if another condition affects how vitamins and minerals are absorbed by the body. Read more about the causes of rickets. Who's affected? Rickets was common in the past, but it mostly disappeared in the western world during the early 20th century after foods like margarine and cereal were fortified with vitamin D. However, in recent years, there's been an increase in cases of rickets in the UK. The number of rickets cases is still relatively small \u2013 less than 700 cases were diagnosed in hospitals in England in 2013-14 \u2013 but studies have shown a significant number of people in the UK have low levels of vitamin D in their blood. Any child whose diet doesn't contain enough vitamin D or calcium can develop rickets, but the condition is more common in children with dark skin, as this means they need more sunlight to get enough vitamin D, as well as children born prematurely or taking medication that interferes with vitamin D. Treating rickets For most children, rickets can be successfully treated by ensuring they eat foods that contain calcium and vitamin D, or by taking vitamin supplements. Some families are eligible for free vitamin supplements from the government's Healthy Start scheme \u2013 find out if you qualify for Healthy Start. If your child has problems absorbing vitamins and minerals, they may need a higher supplement dose or a yearly vitamin D injection. Read more about treating rickets. Preventing rickets Rickets can easily be prevented by eating a diet that includes vitamin D and calcium, spending some time in sunlight, and if necessary, taking vitamin D supplements. Read more about: preventing rickets who should take vitamin D supplements how much vitamin D adults, children and babies need When to seek medical advice Take your child to see your GP if they have any of the signs and symptoms of rickets. Your GP will carry out a physical examination to check for any obvious problems. They may also discuss your child's medical history, diet, family history, and any medication they're taking. A blood test to measure calcium, phosphorous and vitamin D levels can usually confirm a diagnosis of rickets, although your child may also have some X-rays or possibly a bone density scan (DEXA scan). This is a type of X-ray that measures the calcium content in bones. Page last reviewed: 21\/12\/2015 Next review due: 21\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 676 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 434  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 148  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Calcium Vitamin D Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D and sunlight Vitamins during pregnancy Vitamins for children External links BDA: food fact sheets British Nutrition Foundation Healthy Start Boost your child's bone health How to make sure your child has strong bones for life, with bone-boosting activities and eating tips for healthy bones How to get vitamin D from sunlight How do you get enough sunshine, but not too much? Here's what the experts say, plus who's most at risk of low vitamin D Vitamins, minerals and supplements How to get all the nutrients you need, and safety advice about supplements NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Osteomyelitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Osteomyelitis","content":"Osteomyelitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Osteomyelitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Osteomyelitis Clinical trials Osteomyelitis Osteomyelitis Symptoms Osteomyelitis Causes Osteomyelitis Diagnosis Osteomyelitis Treatment Osteomyelitis Prevention Introduction  Osteomyelitis is the medical term for a bone infection, usually caused by bacteria. Osteomyelitis most commonly affects the long bones in the legs, but other bones, such as those in the back or arms, can also be affected. Symptoms of osteomyelitis may include: a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above bone pain, which can often be intense swelling, redness and a warm sensation in the affected area  Read more about the symptoms of osteomyelitis. The condition is often referred to as either: acute osteomyelitis \u2013 when the infection develops following an injury, infection or underlying condition chronic osteomyelitis \u2013 when the condition regularly returns When to see your GP Osteomyelitis can affect people of any age, so visit your GP if you or your child experiences persistent bone pain with a fever. Very young children do not always develop a fever when they have osteomyelitis and they may not be able to communicate any bone pain. You should see your GP if your child becomes irritable, has a reduced appetite and is reluctant to use a certain part of their body (most often an arm or leg). Why does osteomyelitis happen? Osteomyelitis develops when the bone becomes infected. In most cases, bacteria is responsible for the infection, although it can also be caused by fungi. Blood tests and a biopsy may be used to determine whether you have an infection and what caused it. Read more about diagnosing osteomyelitis. There are two ways the infection can occur: following an injury (known as contiguous osteomyelitis) \u2013 such as a fractured bone, animal bite or during surgery via the bloodstream (known as haematogenous osteomyelitis) Contiguous osteomyelitis is more common in adults, whereas haematogenous osteomyelitis is more common in children. Certain things can increase your chances of developing osteomyelitis. For example, if you have a condition that affects the blood supply to certain parts of your body, such as diabetes, or a condition that weakens the immune system, such as rheumatoid arthritis. Osteomyelitis is also known to be a common complication of certain health conditions. For example: 30-40% of people with diabetes who experience a puncture injury to their foot will develop osteomyelitis less than one in every 200 people with sickle cell anaemia will develop osteomyelitis in any given year Osteomyelitis can become chronic osteomyelitis if not treated quickly, as the bones can become permanently damaged, resulting in persistent pain and loss of function. Read more about the causes of osteomyelitis. How is osteomyelitis treated? If diagnosed early, osteomyelitis can be treated with antibiotics for at least four to six weeks. At first, you may have to stay in hospital to receive antibiotics, but you should be able to take them at home when you start to get better. In severe or chronic cases of osteomyelitis, surgery may be used in combination with antibiotics. Surgery is most often used to remove damaged bone and drain pus from wounds. Read more about treating osteomyelitis. Complications Although osteomyelitis is usually treated successfully with antibiotics, chronic and severe cases can lead to other problems. Recurring osteomyelitis If you've had a previous episode of osteomyelitis, there's a chance of it returning. This is because underlying conditions that often cause osteomyelitis, such as poor circulation or a weakened immune system, can be difficult to treat. Gangrene If the blood supply to the bone is severely reduced, this can cause the tissue to die (gangrene). Amputation may be used as a last resort if gangrene develops. However, the condition can usually be treated before it reaches this stage. Preventing osteomyelitis It's not always possible to avoid getting osteomyelitis. But there are steps you can take to reduce your chances. Cleaning wounds thoroughly with water and dressing them in a clean bandage will reduce your chances of getting an infection from an injury. Improving your general health will help reduce the risk of developing conditions that can lead to osteomyelitis. Read more about preventing osteomyelitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Diabetes and feet Foot health is especially important for people with diabetes. Find out how to take care of your feet and when to get help Page last reviewed: 21\/10\/2014 Next review due: 21\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 171 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Signs of serious illness in children Diabetes Broken ankle Hip replacement Knee replacement Living with diabetes External links The Pain Toolkit NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Osteopathy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Osteopathy","content":"Osteopathy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Osteopathy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Osteopathy Clinical trials Osteopathy Osteopathy How it's performed Osteopathy Safety and regulation Osteopathy Evidence Introduction  Osteopathy is a way of detecting, treating and preventing health problems by moving, stretching and massaging a person's muscles and joints. Osteopathy is based on the principle that the wellbeing of an individual depends on their bones, muscles, ligaments and connective tissue functioning smoothly together. Osteopaths use physical manipulation, stretching and massage, with the aim of: increasing the mobility of joints relieving muscle tension enhancing the blood supply to tissues helping the body to heal They use a range of techniques, but don't use drugs or surgery. In the UK, osteopathy is a complementary or alternative medicine (CAM), and is different from conventional western medicine. Although osteopaths may use some conventional medical techniques, the use of osteopathy isn't always based on scientific evidence. Read about what happens when you visit an osteopath. Common uses Most people who see an osteopath do so for help with conditions that affect the muscles, bones and joints, such as: lower back pain neck pain shoulder pain arthritis problems with the pelvis, hips and legs sports injuries problems with posture caused by driving, work or pregnancy Some osteopaths claim to be able to treat conditions not directly related to muscles, bones and joints, such as headaches, migraines, painful periods, digestive disorders, depression and excessive crying in babies (colic). However, there isn't enough evidence to suggest that osteopathy can treat these problems. Does osteopathy work? There's good evidence that osteopathy is effective in treating persistent lower back pain. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends it as a treatment for this condition. There's limited evidence to suggest it may be effective for some types of neck, shoulder or lower limb pain and recovery after hip or knee operations. There's currently no good evidence that osteopathy is effective as a treatment for health conditions unrelated to the musculoskeletal system (bones and muscles). Read more about the evidence on osteopathy. Accessing osteopathy While osteopathy isn't widely available on the NHS, your GP or local clinical commissioning group (CCG) should be able to tell you whether it's available in your area. Most people pay for osteopathy treatment privately. Treatment costs vary, but typically range from £35 to £50 for a 30-40 minute session. You don't need to be referred by your GP to see an osteopath privately. Most private health insurance providers also provide cover for osteopathic treatment. Only people registered with the General Osteopathic Council (GOsC) are allowed to practise as or call themselves osteopaths. You can find a registered osteopath near you on the GOsC website. Read more about how osteopathy is regulated. Page last reviewed: 10\/06\/2015 Next review due: 10\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 283 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 92  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Can I see an osteopath on the NHS? Managing back pain Back pain Complementary and alternative medicine External links General Osteopathic Council The Institute of Osteopathy Osteopathic Centre for Children Community content from HealthUnlocked Back pain guide Explore this guide for information about different types of back pain and how you can prevent it, plus advice on treatment 'My search for a back pain cure' Vicky Joseph spent years searching for a cure for her back pain. Find out what finally helped her NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Osteophyte (bone spur)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/osteophyte","content":"Osteophyte (bone spur) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Osteophyte (bone spur)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Osteophytes are bony lumps (bone spurs) that grow on the bones of the spine or around the joints. They often form next to joints affected by osteoarthritis (a condition that causes joints to become painful and stiff). Osteophytes can grow from any bone, but they're most often found in the: neck shoulder knee lower back fingers or big toe foot or heel Osteophyte symptoms Osteophytes don't always cause symptoms. They can cause problems if they: rub against other bone or tissue restrict movement squeeze nearby nerves For example, osteophytes that occur in the: spine can cause pain and stiffness in the back neck can pinch a nearby nerve and cause pain, pins and needles, numbness or weakness in the arms shoulder can limit the space available for tendons and ligaments, and may be linked to tendonitis or a rotator cuff tear hip and knee can reduce the range of movement and are often associated with painful arthritis  knee may cause pain when you bend and extend your leg fingers can cause lumps What causes osteophytes? Osteophytes tend to form when the joints have been affected by arthritis. Osteoarthritis damages cartilage, which is the tough, white, flexible tissue that lines the bones and allows the joints to move easily. Osteoarthritis mostly occurs in the knees, hips, spine and small joints of the hands and base of the big toe. As the joints become increasingly damaged, new bone may form around the joints. These bony growths are called osteophytes. Osteophytes can also form in the spine as a result of ankylosing spondylitis (a type of arthritis that specifically affects the spine). When to seek medical advice See your GP if you have joint pain or stiffness, or if you have other symptoms in an area of your body, such as numbness or nerve pain. They'll investigate the underlying cause.   Your GP will ask you about your symptoms and they may examine the affected area. They may test your joint movements and muscle strength. They'll also look at your medical history.  You may be referred for an X-ray, which will highlight any arthritis in the joint and osteophytes. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan is better for examining torn ligaments or tendons. Treating osteophytes Osteophytes don't usually cause pain, but the associated arthritis might. If you're in pain, over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, may help. Ibuprofen is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), which can also help reduce any swelling and inflammation. If you're overweight, losing weight will help by relieving some of the strain on your joints. A physiotherapist may also be able to help you by recommending exercises that can strengthen the muscles surrounding the problem area, and by helping to improve your range of movement. Surgery can sometimes be used to help manage any underlying arthritis in the joint. It can be helpful for osteoarthritis that affects your hips, knees or joints, particularly those at the base of your thumb. Read more about treating osteoarthritis. There's usually no need to remove an osteophyte, unless it's irritating a nerve in the spine or restricting a joint's range of movement. If you do need surgery to remove an osteophyte, your surgeon will explain the procedure's risks and benefits. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 11\/06\/2016 Next review due: 11\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 142 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Ankylosing spondylitis Arthritis Having an operation Hip replacement Knee replacement External links Arthritis Research UK: common aches and pains BOA: patient information Pain Concern: a guide to managing pain (PDF, 1.98MB) Osteoarthritis Osteoarthritis is a condition that causes the joints to become painful, stiff and swollen. Read more about why it happens and how it's treated Impingement syndrome Impingement syndrome is pain and often weakness when you raise your arm, caused by a muscle tendon 'catching' in your shoulder NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Osteoporosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Osteoporosis","content":"Osteoporosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Osteoporosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Osteoporosis Real stories Osteoporosis Clinical trials Osteoporosis Community Osteoporosis Osteoporosis Causes Osteoporosis Treatment Osteoporosis Prevention Osteoporosis Living with   Osteoporosis is a condition that weakens bones, making them fragile and more likely to break. It develops slowly over several years and is often only diagnosed when a minor fall or sudden impact causes a bone fracture. The most common injuries in people with osteoporosis are: wrist fractures hip fractures fractures of the spinal bones (vertebrae) However, they can also occur in other bones, such as in the arm or pelvis. Sometimes a cough or sneeze can cause a rib fracture or the partial collapse of one of the bones of the spine. Osteoporosis isn't usually painful until a fracture occurs, but spinal fractures are a common cause of long-term (chronic) pain. Although a fracture is the first sign of osteoporosis, some older people develop the characteristic stooped (bent forward) posture. It happens when the bones in the spine have fractured, making it difficult to support the weight of the body. Who's affected? Osteoporosis affects over three million people in the UK. More than 500,000 people receive hospital treatment for fragility fractures (fractures that occur from standing height or less) every year as a result of osteoporosis. Causes of osteoporosis Losing bone is a normal part of the ageing process, but some people lose bone density much faster than normal. This can lead to osteoporosis and an increased risk of fractures. Women also lose bone rapidly in the first few years after the menopause (when monthly periods stop and the ovaries stop producing an egg). Women are more at risk of osteoporosis than men, particularly if the menopause begins early (before the age of 45). Many other factors can also increase the risk of developing osteoporosis, including: long-term use of high-dose oral corticosteroids other medical conditions \u2013 such as inflammatory conditions, hormone-related conditions, or malabsorption problems a family history of osteoporosis \u2013 particularly history of a hip fracture in a parent long-term use of certain medications which can affect bone strength or hormone levels having a low body mass index (BMI) heavy drinking and smoking Read more about the causes of osteoporosis. Diagnosing osteoporosis Risk assessment tools If your doctor suspects you have osteoporosis, they can make an assessment using an online programme, such as FRAX or Q-Fracture. These tools help to predict a person's risk of fracture between the ages of 40 and 90. The algorithms used give a 10-year probability of hip fracture and a 10-year probability of a major fracture in the spine, hip, shoulder or forearm. DEXA scan They may also refer you for a DEXA (DXA) scan to measure your bone mineral density. It's a short, painless procedure that takes about five minutes, depending on the part of the body being scanned. Your bone mineral density can be compared to the bone mineral density of a healthy young adult and someone who's the same age and sex as you. The difference is calculated as a standard deviation (SD) and is called a T score. Standard deviation is a measure of variability based on an average or expected value. A T score of: above -1 SD is normal  between -1 and -2.5 SD is defined as decreased bone mineral density compared with peak bone mass below -2.5 is defined as osteoporosis Osteopenia You may be diagnosed with osteopenia if bone density tests show you have decreased bone density, but not enough to be classed as osteoporosis. Your doctor may still recommend some of the treatments described below, depending on your results and your risk of fracture. Treating osteoporosis Treatment for osteoporosis is based on treating and preventing fractures, and using medication to strengthen bones. The decision about whether you need treatment depends on your risk of fracture. This will be based on a number of factors such as your age, sex and the results of your DEXA scan. If you need treatment, your doctor can suggest the safest and most effective treatment plan for you. Read more about how osteoporosis is treated. Preventing osteoporosis If you're at risk of developing osteoporosis, you should take steps to help keep your bones healthy. This may include: taking regular exercise healthy eating \u2013 including foods rich in calcium and vitamin D taking a daily supplement containing 10 micrograms (mcg) of vitamin D making lifestyle changes \u2013 such as giving up smoking and reducing your alcohol consumption Read more about preventing osteoporosis. Living with osteoporosis If you're diagnosed with osteoporosis, there are steps you can take to reduce your chances of a fall, such as removing hazards from your home and having regular sight tests and hearing tests. To help you recover from a fracture, you can try using: hot and cold treatments such as warm baths and cold packs transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) \u2013 where a small battery-operated device is used to stimulate the nerves and reduce pain relaxation techniques Speak to your GP or nurse if you're worried about living with a long-term condition. They may be able to answer any questions you have. You may also find it helpful to talk to a trained counsellor or psychologist, or other people with the condition. The National Osteoporosis Society can put you in touch with local support groups, and they also have an online discussion forum. Read more about living with osteoporosis. At-risk groups Osteoporosis often affects women, particularly after the menopause (when monthly periods stop). However, it can also sometimes affect men, younger women and children. Other groups who are at risk of developing osteoporosis include: people who have been taking steroid medication for more than three months women who have had their ovaries removed people with a family history of osteoporosis people with an eating disorder, such as anorexia or bulimia  people who don't exercise regularly people who smoke or drink heavily Page last reviewed: 20\/06\/2016 Next review due: 20\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 651 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 300  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 186  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Healthy bones Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Dr Pam Brown, a GP, explains how to keep your bones healthy and why it's important to do so. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links DEXA (DXA) scan Healthy bones Getting vitamin D from sunlight Health and fitness Healthy eating Men's health 60-plus Vitamins and minerals Women's health 60-plus External links Age UK: osteoporosis Arthritis Research UK: osteoporosis healthtalk.org: osteoporosis Lab Tests Online UK: bone markers Menopause Matters: osteoporosis National Osteoporosis Society Community content from HealthUnlocked Menopause and bone health Keep your bones healthy during and after menopause with bone-strengthening diet, exercise and lifestyle tips Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Broken arm or wrist A broken arm or wrist is usually caused by a fall or by force from a collision. It typically takes about 6-8 weeks to heal in adults, and less time in children The importance of exercise for the elderly How exercise can help older people stay healthy, energetic and independent well into old age Find and choose services for Osteoporosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Otitis externa","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Otitis-externa","content":"Otitis externa - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Otitis externa  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Otitis-externa Clinical trials Otitis externa Otitis-externa Symptoms Otitis-externa Causes Otitis-externa Treatment Otitis-externa Complications Otitis-externa Prevention Introduction  Otitis externa is a condition that causes inflammation (redness and swelling) of the external ear canal, which is the tube between the outer ear and eardrum. Otitis externa is often referred to as \"swimmer's ear\" because repeated exposure to water can make the ear canal more vulnerable to inflammation. Symptoms of otitis externa include: ear pain, which can be severe itchiness in the ear canal a discharge of liquid or pus from the ear some degree of temporary hearing loss Usually only one ear is affected. With treatment, these symptoms should clear up within a few days. However, some cases can persist for several months or longer. Read more about the symptoms of otitis externa. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you may have otitis externa. Your GP will ask about your symptoms and whether you regularly use any items that are inserted into your ears, such as hearing aids or ear plugs. They may also examine inside your ear using an instrument called an otoscope. If you have recurring episodes of otitis externa that haven't responded to treatment, your GP may take a swab of the inside of your ear. This will be tested to help determine what type of infection you have, if any, so appropriate medication can be prescribed. What causes otitis externa? Most cases of otitis externa are caused by a bacterial infection, although the condition can also be caused by: irritation fungal infections allergies There are a number of things that can make you more likely to develop otitis externa, including: damaging the skin inside your ear regularly getting water in your ear Getting water in your ear is particularly significant, because this can cause you to scratch inside your ear, and the moisture also provides an ideal environment for bacteria to grow. Read more about the causes of otitis externa. Who is affected? Otitis externa is relatively common. It's estimated that around 1 in 10 people will be affected by it at some point in their lives. The condition is slightly more common in women than men and is most often diagnosed in adults aged 45 to 75. People with certain long-term (chronic) conditions are at greater risk of developing the condition. These include: eczema asthma allergic rhinitis How otitis externa is treated Otitis externa sometimes gets better without treatment, but it can take several weeks. Your GP can prescribe ear drop medication that usually improves the symptoms within a few days. There are a number of different types of ear drops that may be used to treat otitis externa, but they all tend to be used several times a day for about a week.  Your GP may refer you to a specialist for further treatment and advice if symptoms are severe or they fail to respond to treatment. Read more about treating otitis externa. Preventing otitis externa To help reduce your chances of developing otitis externa, you should avoid inserting cotton wool buds and other things into your ears (including your fingers), as this can damage the sensitive skin in your ear canal. If you're a regular swimmer, consider using ear plugs when swimming or wearing a swimming cap to cover your ears and protect them from water. You should also try to avoid getting water, soap or shampoo into your ears when you have a shower or bath. Read more about preventing otitis externa. Complications Complications of otitis externa are uncommon, but some can be very serious. One rare complication of otitis externa is malignant otitis externa, which is where an infection spreads from the ear canal into the surrounding bone. This requires prompt treatment with antibiotics and sometimes surgery, as it can be fatal if left untreated. Read more about the complications of otitis externa. Page last reviewed: 22\/10\/2015 Next review due: 22\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 288 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 170  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Earache Earwax Hearing loss Middle ear infection Perforated eardrum External links Action on Hearing Loss British Tinnitus Association ENT UK Earache Earache can be worrying, but it's usually only caused by a minor infection and will often get better in a few days without treatment Are you losing your hearing? Learn to spot signs that you are losing your hearing and what to do if you suspect you have hearing loss Kids: coughs, colds and ear infections What to do when your child has a minor illness such as a cough, cold, sore throat or ear infection NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Otitis media","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Otitis-media","content":"Middle ear infection (otitis media) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Middle ear infection (otitis media)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Otitis-media Clinical trials Otitis media Otitis-media Diagnosis Otitis-media Treatment Otitis-media Complications Introduction  Otitis media is an infection of the middle ear that causes inflammation (redness and swelling) and a build-up of fluid behind the eardrum. Anyone can develop a middle ear infection but infants between six and 15 months old are most commonly affected. It's estimated that around one in every four children experience at least one middle ear infection by the time they're 10 years old. Symptoms of a middle ear infection In most cases, the symptoms of a middle ear infection (otitis media) develop quickly and resolve in a few days. This is known as acute otitis media. The main symptoms include: earache a high temperature (fever) being sick a lack of energy slight hearing loss \u2013 if the middle ear becomes filled with fluid, hearing loss may be a sign of glue ear, also known as otitis media with effusion In some cases, a hole may develop in the eardrum (perforated eardrum) and pus may run out of the ear. The earache, which is caused by the build-up of fluid stretching the eardrum, then resolves. Signs in young children As babies are unable to communicate the source of their discomfort, it can be difficult to tell what's wrong with them. Signs that a young child might have an ear infection include: pulling, tugging or rubbing their ear irritability, poor feeding or restlessness at night coughing or a runny nose diarrhoea unresponsiveness to quiet sounds or other signs of difficulty hearing, such as inattentiveness loss of balance When to seek medical advice Most cases of otitis media pass within a few days, so there's usually no need to see your GP. However, see your GP if you or your child have: symptoms showing no sign of improvement after two or three days a lot of pain a discharge of pus or fluid from the ear \u2013 some people develop a persistent and painless ear discharge that lasts for many months, known as chronic suppurative otitis media an underlying health condition, such as cystic fibrosis or congenital heart disease, which could make complications more likely Read more about diagnosing middle ear infections. How middle ear infections are treated Most ear infections clear up within three to five days and don't need any specific treatment. If necessary, paracetamol or ibuprofen should be used to relieve pain and a high temperature. Make sure any painkillers you give to your child are appropriate for their age. Read more about giving your child painkillers. Antibiotics aren't routinely used to treat middle ear infections, although they may occasionally be prescribed if symptoms persist or are particularly severe. Read more about treating middle ear infections. What causes middle ear infections? Most middle ear infections occur when an infection such as a cold, leads to a build-up of mucus in the middle ear and causes the Eustachian tube (a thin tube that runs from the middle ear to the back of the nose) to become swollen or blocked. This mean mucus can't drain away properly, making it easier for an infection to spread into the middle ear. An enlarged adenoid (soft tissue at the back of the throat) can also block the Eustachian tube. The adenoid can be removed if it causes persistent or frequent ear infections. Read more about removing adenoids. Younger children are particularly vulnerable to middle ear infections as: the Eustachian tube is smaller in children than in adults a child's adenoids are relatively much larger than an adults Certain conditions can also increase the risk of middle ear infections, including: having a cleft palate \u2013 a type of birth defect where a child has a split in the roof of their mouth having Down's syndrome \u2013 a genetic condition that typically causes some level of learning disability and a characteristic range of physical features Can middle ear infections be prevented? It's not possible to prevent middle ear infections, but there are some things you can do that may reduce your child's risk of developing the condition. These include: make sure your child is up-to-date with their routine vaccinations \u2013 particularly the pneumococcal vaccine and the DTaP\/IPV\/Hib (5-in-1) vaccine avoid exposing your child to smoky environments (passive smoking) don't give your child a dummy once they're older than six to 12 months old don't feed your child while they're lying flat on their back if possible, feed your baby with breast milk rather than formula milk Avoiding contact with other children who are unwell may also help reduce your child's chances of catching an infection that could lead to a middle ear infection. Further problems Complications of middle ear infections are fairly rare, but can be serious if they do occur. Most complications are the result of the infection spreading to another part of the ear or head, including: the bones behind the ear (mastoiditis) the inner ear (labyrinthitis) the protective membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) If complications do develop, they often need to be treated immediately with antibiotics in hospital. Read more about the complications of middle ear infections. Page last reviewed: 28\/02\/2016 Next review due: 28\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 322 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Earache Glue ear Otitis externa Perforated eardrum Pregnancy and baby guide Pregnancy and childcare news External links Action on Hearing Loss Family Lives National Deaf Children's Society Kids: coughs, colds and ear infections What to do when your child has a minor illness such as a cough, cold, sore throat or ear infection Earache Earache can be worrying, but it's usually only caused by a minor infection and will often get better in a few days without treatment NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Otitis media with effusion (OME)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/glue-ear","content":"Glue ear - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Glue ear  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Glue-ear Clinical trials Glue ear Glue-ear Symptoms Glue-ear Causes Glue-ear Diagnosis Glue-ear Treatment Glue-ear Complications Glue-ear Prevention Introduction  Glue ear is a common childhood condition where the middle ear becomes filled with fluid. The medical term for glue ear is otitis media with effusion (OME). It's estimated that one in five children around the age of two will be affected by glue ear at any given time, and about 8 in every 10 children will have had glue ear at least once by the time they're 10 years old. The main symptom of glue ear is some hearing loss in one or both ears. This is usually similar to what you experience when you put your hands over your ears. Signs that your child may be having problems hearing include:  struggling to keep up with conversations becoming aggravated because they're trying harder to hear regularly turning up the volume on the television  Contact your GP if you have any concerns about your child's hearing. Read more about the symptoms of glue ear and diagnosing glue ear. What causes glue ear? The middle ear is the part of the ear directly behind the eardrum. It contains three tiny bones that carry sound vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear. The build-up of fluid associated with glue ear prevents these bones moving freely, which affects hearing because it means they can't pass sound vibrations to the inner ear. Exactly what causes this build-up of fluid is unclear, although it seems to be related to a problem with the tube that connects the middle ear to the back of the throat (Eustachian tube). One of the main functions of the Eustachian tube is to help drain fluid from the middle ear. It's thought that problems with the Eustachian tube may be caused by things like a previous ear infection, smoke irritation or allergies. Glue ear isn't caused by a build-up of ear wax, or by getting water in the ear after swimming or showering. Other factors that are also thought to increase the risk of getting glue ear include: growing up in a household where adults smoke being bottlefed rather than breastfed as a baby having siblings (brothers and sisters) who've had the condition Read more about the causes of glue ear and preventing glue ear. Treating glue ear Most cases of glue ear don't require treatment as the condition will improve by itself, usually within three months. Treatment is usually only recommended when symptoms last longer than three months and the hearing loss is thought to be significant enough to interfere with a child's speech and language development. In these circumstances, glue ear can usually be treated using minor surgery, which involves placing small tubes (grommets) in the ear to help drain away the fluid. Read more about treating glue ear. Complications of glue ear Possible complications of glue ear include ear infections and, where hearing loss is more severe, a minor temporary delay in speech and language development. Some of the problems associated with glue ear get better by themselves quite quickly, although further treatment may occasionally be necessary. Read more about the complications of glue ear. Adults with glue ear Glue ear can occasionally develop in adults. It's diagnosed and treated in much the same way as children. If symptoms show no signs of improving after about three months, grommets can be put inside the ear to drain the fluid from it. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 04\/06\/2015 Next review due: 04\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 439 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 271  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Glue ear: an animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail what glue ear is, what causes it and how it's treated. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Hearing loss Hearing tests Middle ear infection Perforated eardrum External links National Deaf Children's Society: glue ear NICE: surgical management of glue ear in children Kids: coughs, colds and ear infections What to do when your child has a minor illness such as a cough, cold, sore throat or ear infection Earache Earache can be worrying, but it's usually only caused by a minor infection and will often get better in a few days without treatment Does your child have a serious illness? Learn the warning signs that your baby or toddler may be seriously ill NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Otoplasty","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/ear-correction-surgery.aspx","content":"Ear correction surgery Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Ear correction surgery Ear correction surgery is cosmetic surgery to alter the size or shape of the ears, or pin them back if they stick out. Pinning back the ears is known as an otoplasty, or pinnaplasty. It's usually carried out on children and young teenagers, although adults may wish to have it done, too. An otoplasty isn't suitable for children younger than five as their ears will still be growing and developing.  Most people are happy with the results of an otoplasty, and generally it's a safe procedure. But it can be expensive and there are still risks to consider. Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, ear correction surgery costs about £2,500-£3,500, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may be needed. It would only be carried out on the NHS under exceptional circumstances \u2013 for example, in rare cases where a person's ears are causing them significant psychological distress.  Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform ear correction surgery.  All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. Also, research the surgeon who is going to carry out the operation. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor's fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many ear operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? An otoplasty for an older child or adult can be done under local anaesthetic by either a plastic surgeon or an ear, nose and throat (ENT) surgeon. It generally involves: making one small cut (incision) behind the ear to expose the ear cartilage removing small pieces of cartilage if necessary  scoring and stitching the remaining structure into the desired shape and position Or, you may be offered a newer technique that involves scoring the cartilage through the ear skin using a needle. No incision is made, but there's not much good evidence about the long-term quality or safety of this method.  Read the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines on incisionless otoplasty. An otoplasty usually takes one to two hours. If local anaesthetic is used, you are able to go home the same day. Recovery During the first few days after surgery, your ears may be sore and tender or numb. You may have a slight tingling sensation for a few weeks. You may need to wear a bandage around your head for the first few days to protect your ears from infection. You won't be able to wash your hair during this time. Some surgeons recommend wearing a head band at night for several weeks to protect the ears while you sleep. There may be some slight bruising, which can last about two weeks. You may want to delay returning to work or school until the bruising has disappeared.  Sometimes the stitches may come to the surface of the skin or cause the ear to feel tender. Pain and discomfort can be treated with over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. You need to avoid swimming and activities that put your ears at risk of injury \u2013 such as judo or rugby \u2013 for several weeks. Within 5 to 10 days: Stitches are removed (unless they were dissolvable stitches) and any bandage would probably come off. After a week or two: Most children would be able to return to school.  After eight weeks: Swimming should be OK. After 12 weeks: Contact sports should be OK. Side effects to expect After ear correction surgery, it's common to have: a small scar behind each ear slight bruising around the ears soreness, numbness or tingling in the ears These symptoms should fade over time. What could go wrong Ear correction surgery can occasionally result in: inflammation of the ear cartilage a blood clot forming in the skin of the ear stiff ears \u2013 it can take several months for them to become flexible again the ears no longer being symmetrical the surgery not being successful and the ears starting to protrude again Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding infection where the cut was made an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are and how they would be treated if they occurred. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong, and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. The surgeon who treated you is best placed to deal with any complications. If you've had ear correction surgery and you're not happy with the results or think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): setting back prominent ears British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS): ear surgery  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 6 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links How do I choose a surgeon?  Splinting and otoplasty on the NHS  Can I get cosmetic surgery on the NHS? Only in exceptional circumstances would the NHS provide cosmetic surgery for health reasons NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Otosclerosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/otosclerosis","content":"Otosclerosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Otosclerosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Otosclerosis is a condition in which there's abnormal bone growth inside the ear. It's a fairly common cause of hearing loss in young adults. There are three tiny bones deep inside the ear, which vibrate when sound waves enter. They transmit sound waves to the cochlea (inner ear), which converts them into signals that are sent to the brain. In otosclerosis, the stapes (\"stirrup\" bone) begins to fuse with the surrounding bone, eventually becoming fixed so it can't move. This means sound is no longer transmitted into the inner ear efficiently. This page covers: Symptoms Is it serious? When to get medical advice Treatments Causes Symptoms of otosclerosis Most people with otosclerosis notice hearing problems in their 20s or 30s. One or both ears can be affected. Symptoms of otosclerosis include: hearing loss that gets gradually worse over time particular difficulty hearing low, deep sounds and whispers speaking quietly because your voice sounds loud to you finding it easier to hear when there's background noise (unlike many other types of hearing loss) tinnitus (hearing sounds such as buzzing or humming that come from inside your body) dizziness \u2013 though this is rare The symptoms of otosclerosis can be hard to tell apart from other causes of hearing loss. Is otosclerosis serious? Otosclerosis can cause mild to severe hearing loss, but it very rarely causes total deafness. Your hearing usually gets worse gradually over months or a few years and may continue to get worse if ignored and left untreated. However, the hearing loss can normally be treated successfully with either hearing aids or surgery (read about treatments below). Hearing is improved or restored in around 80-90% of people who have surgery. Very occasionally, otosclerosis can spread to the inner ear, resulting in a greater level of hearing loss that can't be improved with surgery. When to get medical advice See your GP if you're worried about your hearing. They will ask about your symptoms, examine your ears, take your medical history and may do some simple hearing tests. If your GP suspects a problem such as otosclerosis, you'll be referred to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist or an audiologist (hearing specialist) at a nearby hospital. The specialist will carry out some further hearing tests and possibly a scan of your head to help identify the problem. Treatments for otosclerosis Otosclerosis can usually be treated successfully with either a hearing aid or surgery. If your hearing loss is very mild, you may not need any treatment at first. Hearing aids A hearing aid is an electronic device that increases the volume of sound entering your ear so you can hear things more clearly. The advantage of using a hearing aid is that, unlike surgery, it doesn't carry any risks. Modern hearing aids are small and discreet, and some can be worn inside your ear so they're not obvious. You can talk to an audiologist about the different types of hearing aid available and which may be best for you. Surgery Surgery is an option if you would prefer not to wear a hearing aid. The main operation used is called a stapedotomy or stapedectomy. The operation can be done under either general anaesthetic (you're asleep) or local anaesthetic (you're awake but your ear is numbed). A cut is made inside your ear canal, or occasionally above or in front of your ear, to access the bones inside your ear. Part of the stapes bone is removed and a plastic or metal implant is put into the ear to transmit sound from the remaining bones into the inner ear. You'll be able to go home the same day or the day after. This is a delicate operation that's usually very successful. But as with all operations, it carries a small risk of complications, including: losing more or all of your hearing (in about 1 in 100 cases) altered sense of taste (usually temporary)  new or worsened tinnitus vertigo (usually temporary) facial weakness (very rare) You can discuss the risks and benefits of both surgery and hearing aids with your surgeon to help you decide which you would prefer. Causes of otosclerosis The exact cause of otosclerosis is unclear and it's not known whether you can do anything to prevent it. Many cases seem to run in families and it's thought they may be the result of inheriting a faulty gene from a parent. The condition can occasionally get worse more quickly during pregnancy, which may mean changes in hormone levels sometimes play a role. Information about you If you have otosclerosis, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/06\/2016 Next review due: 17\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 41 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Hearing loss Hearing tests Tinnitus External links British Tinnitus Assocation: otosclerosis Hidden Hearing: otosclerosis Action on Hearing Loss British Deaf Association Are you losing your hearing? Learn to spot signs that you are losing your hearing and what to do if you suspect you have hearing loss NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ovarian cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-ovary","content":"Ovarian cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ovarian cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-ovary Real stories Cancer-of-the-ovary Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-ovary Community Ovarian cancer Cancer-of-the-ovary Symptoms Cancer-of-the-ovary Causes Cancer-of-the-ovary Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-ovary Treatment Cancer-of-the-ovary Living with Cancer-of-the-ovary Prevention Introduction  In the UK, around 7,100 women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer each year. It's the fifth most common cancer among women after breast cancer, bowel cancer, lung cancer and cancer of the uterus (womb). Ovarian cancer is most common in women who have been through the menopause (usually over the age of 50), although it can affect women of any age. As the symptoms of ovarian cancer can be similar to those of other conditions, it can be difficult to recognise. However, there are early symptoms to look out for, such as persistent bloating, pain in the pelvis and lower stomach, and difficulty eating. It's important to see your GP if you experience these symptoms, particularly over a long period of time. Read more about how ovarian cancer is diagnosed. The ovaries are a pair of small organs in the female reproductive system that contain and release an egg once a month. This is known as ovulation. Different types of ovarian cancer affect different parts of the ovaries. Epithelial ovarian cancer, which affects the surface layers of the ovary, is the most common type. This topic focuses on epithelial ovarian cancer. What causes ovarian cancer? The exact cause of ovarian cancer is unknown, but certain things are thought to increase a woman's risk of developing the condition, such as age, the number of eggs the ovaries release and whether someone in your family has had ovarian or breast cancer in the past. However, only 1 in 10 cases of ovarian cancer has a genetic link. Read more about the causes of ovarian cancer. Treating ovarian cancer  The treatment you receive for ovarian cancer will depend on several things, including the stage of your cancer and your general health. Chemotherapy is the main treatment for ovarian cancer, but your treatment will usually involve a combination of surgery and chemotherapy. Read more about how ovarian cancer is treated. Overall, 72 out of every 100 women (72%) will live for at least one year after being diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Around 46 out of 100 (46%) women will live for at least five years, and about 35 out of 100 (35%) will live for at least 10 years. However, women with advanced ovarian cancer have a poorer survival rate. As with most types of cancer, the outlook for ovarian cancer will depend on the stage it's at when diagnosed \u2013 that is, how far the cancer has advanced. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the outlook for ovarian cancer. Being diagnosed with ovarian cancer can affect daily life in many ways. However, support is available for many aspects of living with ovarian cancer, including emotional, financial and long-term health issues. Ovarian cancer screening There are methods of screening for ovarian cancer but, currently, they haven't been fully tested. Screening is only available for women who are at high risk of developing the condition due to a strong family history or inheritance of a particular faulty gene. Clinical trials in the UK are currently being carried out to assess the effectiveness of screening in high-risk women and in the general population. A cervical screening test, which used to be called a smear test, can't detect ovarian cancer. Read more about preventing ovarian cancer. Page last reviewed: 21\/01\/2015 Next review due: 21\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 189 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support End of life issues Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: ovarian cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Macmillan: ovarian cancer Ovacome (support network) Ovarian Cancer Action Target Ovarian Cancer The Eve Appeal Ovarian Cancer Action tool: does your family history put you at risk of ovarian cancer? Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your first priority is medical care. But there are people who can help with other aspects of your life Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Ovarian cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ovarian cyst","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ovarian-cyst","content":"Ovarian cyst - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ovarian cyst  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ovarian-cyst Clinical trials Ovarian cyst Ovarian-cyst Causes Ovarian-cyst Treatment Introduction  An ovarian cyst is a fluid-filled sac that develops on a woman\u2019s ovary. They are very common and do not usually cause any symptoms. Most ovarian cysts occur as part of the normal workings of the ovaries. These cysts are generally harmless and disappear without treatment in a few months. Signs and symptoms An ovarian cyst will usually only cause symptoms if it splits (ruptures), is very large, or it blocks the blood supply to the ovaries. In these cases, you may have: pelvic pain \u2013 this can range from a dull, heavy sensation to a sudden, severe and sharp pain pain during sex difficulty emptying your bowels a frequent need to urinate heavy periods, irregular periods or lighter periods than normal bloating and a swollen tummy feeling very full after only eating a little difficulty getting pregnant (although fertility is unaffected in most women with ovarian cysts \u2013 see below) Visit your GP if you have persistent symptoms of an ovarian cyst. Immediately contact your GP, local out-of-hours service or NHS 111 \u2013 or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department \u2013 if you have sudden, severe pelvic pain. The ovaries The ovaries are two small, bean-shaped organs that are part of the female reproductive system. A woman has two ovaries \u2013 one each side of the womb (uterus). The ovaries have two main functions. They are: to release an egg approximately every 28 days as part of the menstrual cycle to release the female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone, which play an important role in female reproduction Ovarian cysts may affect both ovaries at the same time, or they may only affect one. Types of ovarian cyst The two main types of ovarian are: functional ovarian cysts \u2013 cysts that develop as part of the menstrual cycle and are usually harmless and short-lived; these are the most common type of ovarian cyst pathological ovarian cysts \u2013 cysts that occur due to abnormal cell growth; these are much less common Ovarian cysts can sometimes also be caused by an underlying condition, such as endometriosis. The vast majority of ovarian cysts are non-cancerous (benign), although a small number are cancerous (malignant). Cancerous cysts are more common in women who have been through the menopause. Read more about the causes of ovarian cysts. Diagnosing ovarian cysts If your GP thinks you may have an ovarian cyst, you'll probably be referred for an ultrasound scan, carried out by using a probe placed inside your vagina. If a cyst is identified during the ultrasound scan, you may need to have this monitored with a repeat ultrasound scan in a few weeks, or your GP may refer you to a gynaecologist (a doctor who specialises in female reproductive health). If there is any concern that your cyst could be cancerous, your doctor will also arrange blood tests to look for high levels of chemicals that can indicate ovarian cancer. However, having high levels of these chemicals doesn't necessarily mean you have cancer, as high levels can also be caused by non-cancerous conditions such as endometriosis, a pelvic infection, fibroids or even being on your period. How ovarian cysts are treated Whether an ovarian cyst needs to be treated will depend on: its size and appearance whether you have any symptoms whether you have been through the menopause In most cases, the cyst often disappears after a few months. A follow-up ultrasound scan may be used to confirm this. Due to the slightly increased risk of ovarian cancer in post-menopausal women, regular ultrasound scans and blood tests are usually recommended over the course of a year to monitor the cyst. Large cysts, those causing symptoms, and those that could be cancerous, may need to be surgically removed. Read more about treating ovarian cysts. Do ovarian cysts affect fertility? Ovarian cysts don't usually prevent you from getting pregnant, although they can sometimes make it harder to conceive. If you need an operation to remove your cysts, your surgeon will aim to preserve your fertility whenever possible. This may mean removing just the cyst and leaving the ovaries intact, or only removing one ovary. In some cases, surgery to remove both your ovaries may be necessary, in which case you will no longer produce any eggs. Make sure you talk to your surgeon about the potential effects on your fertility before your operation. Page last reviewed: 09\/12\/2014 Next review due: 09\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 751 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 439  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 166  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Ovarian cysts Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An ovarian cyst is a fluid-filled sac of tissue that develops inside an ovary. Find out about the symptoms it can cause, the long-term effects and the treatment options. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Endometriosis Menopause Ovarian cancer Pelvic pain Periods Polycystic ovarian syndrome External links Cancer Research UK: can ovarian cysts become cancerous? RCOG: ovarian cysts before the menopause (PDF, 294kb) Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Overactive bladder syndrome (OAB)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Incontinence-urinary","content":"Urinary incontinence - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urinary incontinence  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Incontinence-urinary Real stories Incontinence-urinary Clinical trials Urinary incontinence Incontinence-urinary Symptoms Incontinence-urinary Causes Incontinence-urinary Diagnosis Incontinence-urinary Non-surgical treatment Incontinence-urinary Surgery and procedures Incontinence-urinary Prevention Introduction  Urinary incontinence is the unintentional passing of urine. It is a common problem and is thought to affect millions of people worldwide. It's not clear exactly how many people are affected, but it's estimated that between 3 and 6 million people in the UK may have some degree of urinary incontinence. Urinary incontinence affects both men and women, but it tends to be more common in women overall. Signs and symptoms The symptoms of urinary incontinence depend on the type you have. There are several types of urinary incontinence, but the most common are: stress incontinence \u2013 when urine leaks out at times when your bladder is under pressure, for example when you cough or laugh urge incontinence \u2013 when urine leaks as you feel a sudden, intense urge to pass urine, or soon afterwards It is also possible to have a mixture of both stress and urge urinary incontinence. Read more about the symptoms of urinary incontinence. What causes urinary incontinence? The causes of urinary incontinence depend on the type. Stress incontinence is usually the result of the weakening or damaging of the muscles used to prevent urination, such as the pelvic floor muscles and the urethral sphincter. Urge incontinence is usually the result of overactivity of the detrusor muscles, which control the bladder. Certain things can increase the chances of urinary incontinence developing, including: pregnancy and vaginal birth obesity a family history of incontinence increasing age \u2013 although incontinence is not an inevitable part of ageing Read more about the causes of urinary incontinence. Seeking medical advice Although you may feel embarrassed talking to someone about your symptoms, it's a good idea to see your GP if you have any type of urinary incontinence as this can be the first step towards finding a way to effectively manage the problem. Urinary incontinence can usually be diagnosed after a consultation with your GP, who will ask about your symptoms and may carry out a pelvic examination (in women) or rectal examination (in men). Your GP may also suggest you keep a diary in which you note how much fluid you drink and how often you have to urinate. Read more about diagnosing urinary incontinence. How urinary incontinence is treated Initially, your GP may suggest some simple measures to see if they help improve your symptoms. These may include: lifestyle changes, such as losing weight and cutting down on caffeine and alcohol pelvic floor exercises (exercising your pelvic floor muscles by squeezing them) taught by a specialist  bladder training (where you learn ways to help you can wait longer between needing to urinate and passing urine) guided by a specialist You may also benefit from the use of incontinence products, such as absorbent pads and hand-held urinals (urine collection bottles). If you are still unable to manage your symptoms, medication may be recommended.  Surgery may also be considered. The specific procedures suitable for you will depend on the type of incontinence you have. Surgical treatments for stress incontinence, such as tape or sling procedures, are used to reduce pressure on the bladder, or strengthen the muscles that control urination. Operations to treat urge incontinence include enlarging the bladder or implanting a device that stimulates the nerve that controls the detrusor muscles. Read more about non-surgical treatments for urinary incontinence and surgery and procedures for urinary incontinence. Preventing urinary incontinence It is not always possible to prevent urinary incontinence, but there are some steps you can take that may help reduce the chance of it developing, such as: controlling your weight avoiding or cutting down on alcohol keeping fit \u2013 in particular, ensuring that your pelvic floor muscles are strong Read more about preventing urinary incontinence. Urinary incontinence Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Stress, childbirth and age can all cause incontinence. Get expert advice on treatments, including pelvic floor exercises, medication and surgery. Media last reviewed: 07\/05\/2015 Next review due: 07\/05\/2017 How we pass urine Urine passes from the kidneys through tubes called ureters to the bladder, where it is stored. The bladder is supported by pelvic floor muscles. Some of this muscle wraps around the urethra \u2013 the tube that runs from the bladder to outside the body \u2013 to help keep it closed until you need to pass urine. Once the bladder is full, a signal is sent to the brain that you need to pass urine. When you are ready, the brain tells the pelvic floor muscles to relax and open the urethra. The muscles around the bladder contract and push the urine out. A problem in any part of this process can result in urinary incontinence. Page last reviewed: 06\/10\/2014 Next review due: 06\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 526 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 211  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with incontinence Pregnancy exercises Bowel incontinence Urinary catheterisation Can I get incontinence products on the NHS? What are pelvic floor exercises? External links Age UK: incontinence Education and Resources for Improving Childhood Continence (ERIC) MHRA: vaginal tapes for stress urinary incontinence NICE: urinary incontinence in women The taboo of incontinence Find out about the different types of incontinence and why they occur Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Overactive thyroid","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thyroid-over-active","content":"Overactive thyroid - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Overactive thyroid  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thyroid-over-active Clinical trials Thyroid-over-active Community Overactive thyroid Thyroid-over-active Symptoms Thyroid-over-active Causes Thyroid-over-active Diagnosis Thyroid-over-active Treatment Thyroid-over-active Complications Introduction  Overactive thyroid (also known as hyperthyroidism) is a relatively common hormonal condition that occurs when there is too much thyroid hormone in the body. Excess levels of thyroid hormones can then speed up the body\u2019s metabolism, triggering a range of symptoms, such as: nervousness and anxiety hyperactivity \u2013 where a person can\u2019t stay still and is full of nervous energy unexplained or unplanned weight loss  swelling of the thyroid gland, which causes a noticeable lump, known as a goitre, to form in the throat The severity, frequency and range of symptoms can vary from person to person. Read more about the symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland. What causes an overactive thyroid gland? The thyroid gland is found in the neck. It produces hormones that are released into the bloodstream to control the body's growth and metabolism. These hormones are called thyroxine and triiodothyronine. They affect processes such as heart rate and body temperature, and help convert food into energy to keep the body going. In hyperthyroidism, the thyroid gland produces too much thyroxine or triiodothyronine, which speeds up the body's metabolism. There are several possible underlying causes, the most common being Graves' disease, in which the body's immune system targets the thyroid gland and causes it to produce too much of the thyroid hormones. Read more about the causes of an overactive thyroid gland. Treatment An overactive thyroid usually responds well to treatment, and most people are able to control their symptoms. The three most widely used treatments for an overactive thyroid gland are: thionamides \u2013 a group of medications, including carbimazole and methimazole, that stop the thyroid gland producing too much thyroid hormone radioiodine treatment \u2013 a radioactive substance called iodine that helps shrink the thyroid gland, reducing its activity (the radiation contained in iodine is a very low dose and does not pose a threat to health) surgery \u2013 in a small number of cases surgery may be required to remove some or all of the thyroid gland, particularly if there is a large goitre Beta-blockers may also sometimes be used to temporarily relieve many symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland, although it doesn't target the thyroid gland itself. It's common for treatment to lead to the thyroid not producing enough hormones. This is known as having an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism). However, an underactive thyroid is not usually serious and is easily treated. Read more about the treatment of an overactive thyroid gland. Complications Around 1 in 20 people with Graves' disease will also develop symptoms affecting their eyes, such as: double vision  sensitivity to light (photophobia) tearing (excess production of tears) This is known as Graves' ophthalmopathy and should be seen by a doctor who specialises in treating eye conditions (an ophthalmologist). A rarer and more serious complication is a sudden and severe flare-up of symptoms, known as a thyroid storm. A thyroid storm can be life-threatening, as it causes severe dehydration and heart problems. Read more about the complications of an overactive thyroid gland. Who is affected Women are 10 times more likely to have an overactive thyroid gland than men. It is estimated that around 1 in 50 women in England currently live with an overactive thyroid gland. In most cases, symptoms will begin somewhere between the ages of 20 and 40, though they can start at any age, including in childhood. An overactive thyroid gland occurs most frequently in white and Asian people, and less frequently in African-Caribbean people. Overactive thyroid gland Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An endocrinologist explains what causes an overactive thyroid gland, leading to over-production of thyroid hormones, and the variety of treatment options. Media last reviewed: 02\/02\/2015 Next review due: 02\/02\/2017 Page last reviewed: 05\/08\/2014 Next review due: 05\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 701 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 365  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 190  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Underactive thyroid Goitre Women's health 18-39 Thyroiditis External links British Thyroid Foundation Unexpected weight loss The most common reasons for sudden weight loss, and when to see your GP Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Overweight","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/LiveWell\/Loseweight\/Pages\/Loseweighthome.aspx","content":"Lose weight - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lose weight Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Weight loss support Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Start the NHS weight loss plan Develop healthier eating habits and get more active with the NHS Choices weight loss guide. 'I did 10 diets in 50 days and found one that really worked' Bored with yo-yo dieting, Andy tried 10 diets in 50 days in the hope of finding one he could stick to for life. 'I remember being 10 years old and feeling fat' Christine says the NHS weight loss plan helped her overcome a love-hate relationship with food 'I want to be a good role model for my daughter' Phil says the weight loss plan has left him feeling healthier, fitter and more confident. Nine medical reasons for putting on weight Nine medical reasons that could explain why you're putting on weight. The truth about carbs We sort the wheat from the chaff to bring you the evidence-based truth about carbs. Top diets review for 2016 Find a weight loss plan to suit you with our review of the most popular diets. 10 surprising 100-calorie snacks Keep hunger at bay with these low-calorie twists on some of the nation's favourite snacks. Healthy breakfasts (for people who hate breakfast) Get into the habit of eating breakfast with these delicious calorie-counted breakfasts. What's your BMI? Are you a healthy weight for your height? Use this simple interactive tool to find out. Start losing weight Begin your weight loss journey today with these tips on diet and physical activity to get started on losing weight. Britain: 'the fat man of Europe' The story of Britain's obesity crisis, including latest statistics, causes and health risks. Top sources of added sugar in our diet From cola, chocolate and ketchup to beer, yoghurt and soup, find out where most of the added sugar in our diet lurks. The truth about sweeteners Find out the evidence on the safety of some of the most common sweeteners available in the UK. Should you lose weight fast? A steady rate of weight loss will produce results that really last. Hidden causes of weight gain Could cheap food, email, stress or late nights be causing you to put on weight? Healthy food swaps Stop eating high-calorie foods and swap them for a healthy, balanced alternative. Eight tips for healthy eating Start eating well with these eight tips for a healthy diet. Diet danger zones Temptation is never far away when you're trying to lose weight. Learn how to handle those diet danger zones. How to diet Find out why some diets are bad for you, plus how to lose weight the healthy way. Very low calorie diets A VLCD contains fewer than 1,000 calories a day. Find out if it's right for you. Food labels How to understand food labels and make healthier choices when shopping. Understanding calories Calories mean energy, and the right energy balance is the key to a healthy weight. How can I speed up my metabolism? What can you do to give your metabolism a boost to help you lose weight? Height\/weight chart Use this chart to check if you're the right weight for your height. Keep weight off Keep losing weight only to regain it? Find out how to make your weight loss stick. How your GP can help you lose weight What your GP can do to help if you have a weight problem. 10-minute workouts Choose from six 10-minute home workouts to improve your general fitness and tone your abs, legs, buttocks and triceps. The 10,000 steps challenge Walking 10,000 steps a day can build stamina, burn excess calories and give you a healthier heart. 'I ran a marathon after losing weight' Christine ran her very first marathon after losing weight with the NHS weight loss plan. My 12-week weight loss journey Stephanie Higgins tells how she lost 9.2kg with the NHS weight loss plan without ever going hungry. Weight loss: 'I knew I had to change' Robert Langston was overweight, asthmatic and diabetic. Find out how he turned his life around. 'Is weight loss surgery right for me?' If you've tried lifestyle changes, surgery might be right for you. But it's not an easy option. Vicky's story: 'My gastric band surgery' Vicky talks about the changes she had to make to her diet before and after weight loss surgery, and what it's like living with a gastric band. 'Slimming clubs helped me lose weight' Mother-of-four Cheryl Taylor tells how slimming clubs helped her drop nine dress sizes in two years and turn her life around. Weight loss wonders Brendan and Debbie Byrne lost weight together when they swapped takeaways for healthy home cooking. How to stay motivated When you're trying to lose weight, it can be tough to stay motivated. Real-life slimmers share tips that work. 'I beat middle-age spread' Julie Thompson put on weight during the menopause. When she hit 79kg, she joined a slimming club. 'Weight loss feels great' Nick Green's weight rocketed when he stopped smoking. But with a healthy diet and exercise, he lost more than 40kg and got fit. 'I weighed 70kg at age 11' Chris Bennington, 14, lost more than a stone when he swapped pizza and chips for healthy pasta. Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked Want to lose weight? Sign up for email support Sign up form First name, last name (optional) Your email address Confirm email address By clicking on the button below you are agreeing to our terms and conditions. View our privacy policy. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Probiotics Many health claims are made about probiotics. Find out when they might help and when to be sceptical Overweight children: advice for parents Practical advice for parents of overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and physical activity Is green tea a superfood? From weight loss wonder to cancer cure, we review the evidence surrounding the health claims made about green tea Weight loss myths Do slimming pills work? Is healthy food expensive? The truth behind 10 common myths about weight loss Bodybuilding and sports supplements Supplements are popular for people wanting to lose weight and build muscle, but some are illegal and dangerous Cut down on your calories Many of us are eating too much and not being active enough. Find out how to cut the calories Strength and Flex Download our Strength and flexibility podcast series and get a free personal trainer 5K+ running podcasts for C25K graduates Take your running to the next level with new podcasts for Couch to 5K graduates Health and fitness Boost your health and fitness with fun and practical ideas to get active and improve your general health Food and diet Find out how to achieve a healthy, nutritious diet to help you look and feel your best Superfoods: the evidence We examine the evidence behind the health claims made about the most popular superfoods NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lose weight","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/LiveWell\/Loseweight\/Pages\/Loseweighthome.aspx","content":"Lose weight - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lose weight Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Weight loss support Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Start the NHS weight loss plan Develop healthier eating habits and get more active with the NHS Choices weight loss guide. 'I did 10 diets in 50 days and found one that really worked' Bored with yo-yo dieting, Andy tried 10 diets in 50 days in the hope of finding one he could stick to for life. 'I remember being 10 years old and feeling fat' Christine says the NHS weight loss plan helped her overcome a love-hate relationship with food 'I want to be a good role model for my daughter' Phil says the weight loss plan has left him feeling healthier, fitter and more confident. Nine medical reasons for putting on weight Nine medical reasons that could explain why you're putting on weight. The truth about carbs We sort the wheat from the chaff to bring you the evidence-based truth about carbs. Top diets review for 2016 Find a weight loss plan to suit you with our review of the most popular diets. 10 surprising 100-calorie snacks Keep hunger at bay with these low-calorie twists on some of the nation's favourite snacks. Healthy breakfasts (for people who hate breakfast) Get into the habit of eating breakfast with these delicious calorie-counted breakfasts. What's your BMI? Are you a healthy weight for your height? Use this simple interactive tool to find out. Start losing weight Begin your weight loss journey today with these tips on diet and physical activity to get started on losing weight. Britain: 'the fat man of Europe' The story of Britain's obesity crisis, including latest statistics, causes and health risks. Top sources of added sugar in our diet From cola, chocolate and ketchup to beer, yoghurt and soup, find out where most of the added sugar in our diet lurks. The truth about sweeteners Find out the evidence on the safety of some of the most common sweeteners available in the UK. Should you lose weight fast? A steady rate of weight loss will produce results that really last. Hidden causes of weight gain Could cheap food, email, stress or late nights be causing you to put on weight? Healthy food swaps Stop eating high-calorie foods and swap them for a healthy, balanced alternative. Eight tips for healthy eating Start eating well with these eight tips for a healthy diet. Diet danger zones Temptation is never far away when you're trying to lose weight. Learn how to handle those diet danger zones. How to diet Find out why some diets are bad for you, plus how to lose weight the healthy way. Very low calorie diets A VLCD contains fewer than 1,000 calories a day. Find out if it's right for you. Food labels How to understand food labels and make healthier choices when shopping. Understanding calories Calories mean energy, and the right energy balance is the key to a healthy weight. How can I speed up my metabolism? What can you do to give your metabolism a boost to help you lose weight? Height\/weight chart Use this chart to check if you're the right weight for your height. Keep weight off Keep losing weight only to regain it? Find out how to make your weight loss stick. How your GP can help you lose weight What your GP can do to help if you have a weight problem. 10-minute workouts Choose from six 10-minute home workouts to improve your general fitness and tone your abs, legs, buttocks and triceps. The 10,000 steps challenge Walking 10,000 steps a day can build stamina, burn excess calories and give you a healthier heart. 'I ran a marathon after losing weight' Christine ran her very first marathon after losing weight with the NHS weight loss plan. My 12-week weight loss journey Stephanie Higgins tells how she lost 9.2kg with the NHS weight loss plan without ever going hungry. Weight loss: 'I knew I had to change' Robert Langston was overweight, asthmatic and diabetic. Find out how he turned his life around. 'Is weight loss surgery right for me?' If you've tried lifestyle changes, surgery might be right for you. But it's not an easy option. Vicky's story: 'My gastric band surgery' Vicky talks about the changes she had to make to her diet before and after weight loss surgery, and what it's like living with a gastric band. 'Slimming clubs helped me lose weight' Mother-of-four Cheryl Taylor tells how slimming clubs helped her drop nine dress sizes in two years and turn her life around. Weight loss wonders Brendan and Debbie Byrne lost weight together when they swapped takeaways for healthy home cooking. How to stay motivated When you're trying to lose weight, it can be tough to stay motivated. Real-life slimmers share tips that work. 'I beat middle-age spread' Julie Thompson put on weight during the menopause. When she hit 79kg, she joined a slimming club. 'Weight loss feels great' Nick Green's weight rocketed when he stopped smoking. But with a healthy diet and exercise, he lost more than 40kg and got fit. 'I weighed 70kg at age 11' Chris Bennington, 14, lost more than a stone when he swapped pizza and chips for healthy pasta. Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked Want to lose weight? Sign up for email support Sign up form First name, last name (optional) Your email address Confirm email address By clicking on the button below you are agreeing to our terms and conditions. View our privacy policy. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Probiotics Many health claims are made about probiotics. Find out when they might help and when to be sceptical Overweight children: advice for parents Practical advice for parents of overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and physical activity Is green tea a superfood? From weight loss wonder to cancer cure, we review the evidence surrounding the health claims made about green tea Weight loss myths Do slimming pills work? Is healthy food expensive? The truth behind 10 common myths about weight loss Bodybuilding and sports supplements Supplements are popular for people wanting to lose weight and build muscle, but some are illegal and dangerous Cut down on your calories Many of us are eating too much and not being active enough. Find out how to cut the calories Strength and Flex Download our Strength and flexibility podcast series and get a free personal trainer 5K+ running podcasts for C25K graduates Take your running to the next level with new podcasts for Couch to 5K graduates Health and fitness Boost your health and fitness with fun and practical ideas to get active and improve your general health Food and diet Find out how to achieve a healthy, nutritious diet to help you look and feel your best Superfoods: the evidence We examine the evidence behind the health claims made about the most popular superfoods NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Overweight children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/childhealth6-15\/Pages\/child-health-measurement-programme-overweight-advice.aspx","content":"Overweight children: advice for parents - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories What can I do if my child is overweight? Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus If your child is overweight, there's lots you can do to help them become a healthy weight as they grow. No diets! Don\u2019t be tempted to put your child on a weight-loss diet. Forcing an overweight child to go hungry can backfire, making them crave food even more.   Your child's still growing, so try to maintain their weight while they continue to grow in height. This way they will grow taller without necessarily adding pounds, and their weight could move into a healthier range. As a parent, it can sometimes be difficult to tell that your child is overweight. A child may not look particularly heavy to be overweight. And because more children are becoming heavier at a younger age, we've become used to seeing bigger children. Research shows children who achieve a healthy weight tend to be fitter, healthier, better able to learn, and more self-confident. They're also less likely to have low self-esteem or be bullied. And they're much less likely to have health problems in later life. As a parent, there's lots you can do to help your child become a healthier weight. Getting them to be more active and eat well is important. Here's lots of practical advice to help you. If your child has a medical condition, the advice in this article may not be relevant and you should check first with their GP or hospital doctor. Steps for success Weight checks Every so often, check whether your child is moving into a healthy weight range with our Healthy weight calculator. Here are five key ways you can help your child maintain a healthy weight. You can read this whole page or click on the links below to go directly to the topic you want to know about: Be a good role model Encourage 60 minutes of physical activity a day Keep to child-size portions Eat healthy meals, drinks and snacks Less screen time and more sleep! Be a good role model One of the best ways to instil good habits in your child is for you to be a good role model. Children learn by example. One of the most powerful ways to encourage your child to be active and eat well is to do so yourself. Set a good example by going for a walk or bike ride instead of watching TV or surfing the internet. Playing in the park or swimming with your children shows them being active is fun, and it's a great way for you all to spend time together.  Any changes you make to your child's diet and lifestyle are much more likely to be accepted if the changes are small and involve the whole family. Here are 10 ways to get healthy as a family. If you're not sure what activities you'd like to try as a family, use this What's your sport? tool to find out what you're best suited to. Physical activity may be more appealing for your child if you do something as a family. Here are 10 ways to get active with your kids. Get ideas for getting children involved in switching to a healthier lifestyle. Get active Overweight children don't need to do more exercise than slimmer children. Their extra body weight means they will naturally burn more calories for the same activity. All children need about 60 minutes of physical activity a day for good health, but it doesn't need to be all at once. Several short 10-minute or even five-minute bursts of activity throughout the day can be just as good as an hour-long stretch. For younger children, it can take the form of active play, such as ball games, chasing games like \"it\" and \"tag\", riding a scooter, and using playground swings, climbing frames and see-saws. For older children it could include riding a bike, skateboarding, walking to school, skipping, swimming, dancing and martial arts. Walking or cycling short distances instead of using the car or bus is a great way to be active together as a family \u2013 and you'll save money, too. Find out the amount and type of physical activity recommended for under-5s. Find out the amount and type of physical activity recommended for children and young people aged 5 to 18. Join Change4Life for free and your child will get their own personalised activity plan full of good ideas for getting moving. Child-size portions Try to avoid feeding your child oversized portions. There's very little official guidance on precisely how much food children require, so you'll need to use your own judgement. A good rule of thumb is to start meals with small servings and let your child ask for more if they're still hungry. Try not to make your child finish everything on the plate or eat more than they want to. And avoid using adult-size plates for younger children as it encourages them to eat oversized portions. It may also help if you encourage your child to eat slowly and have set mealtimes. You can use mealtimes as an opportunity to catch up on what's happened during the day. Explain to your child how to get the balance of their diet right using the eatwell guide \u2013 it shows how much they should eat from each food group. Read more about what counts as a balanced diet. Knowing the calorie content of foods can be useful \u2013 here's information to help you and your child understand calories. Get ideas for healthy packed lunches. Eat healthy meals Children, just like adults, should aim to eat five or more portions of fruit and vegetables everyday. They're a great source of fibre and vitamins and minerals. Getting 5 A DAY shouldn't be too difficult. Almost all fruit and vegetables count towards your child's 5 A DAY, including fresh, tinned, frozen and dried. Juices, smoothies, beans and pulses also count. Be aware that unsweetened 100% fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies can only ever count as a maximum of one portion of their 5 A DAY. For example, if they have two glasses of fruit juice and a smoothie in one day, that still only counts as one portion.  Their combined total of drinks from fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies should not be more than 150ml a day \u2013 which is a small glass. For example, if they have 150ml of orange juice and 150ml smoothie in one day, they\u2019ll have exceeded the recommendation by 150ml. When fruit is blended or juiced, it releases the sugars which increases the risk of tooth decay so it\u2019s best to drink fruit juice or smoothies at mealtimes. Discourage your child from having sugary or high-fat foods like sweets, cakes, biscuits, some sugary cereals, and sugar-sweetened soft and fizzy drinks. These foods and drinks tend to be high in calories and low in nutrients. Aim for your child to get most of their calories from healthier foods such as fruit and vegetables, and starchy foods such as bread, potatoes, pasta and rice (preferably wholemeal). And switch sweetened soft drinks for water. Fussy eater? Not a problem with these tips to help your kids enjoy their 5 A DAY. Tasty 5 A DAY family-friendly recipes. Find out how many soft or fizzy drinks children can have a day. Find out more about healthy drinks for children. Swap high-fat foods for these healthier alternatives. Try these sugar swaps \u2013 healthier swaps for breakfast, snacks and puddings. Ideas for sugar swaps when you shop. Less screen time and more sleep! Alongside the advice to get them moving more is the need to reduce the time they spend sitting or lying down in the day. Help your children avoid sitting and lying around too much as this makes them more likely to put on weight. Limit the time they spend on inactive pastimes like watching TV, playing video games and playing on electronic devices. There's no hard and fast advice on how much is too much, but experts advise that children should watch no more than two hours of television each day. And remove all screens (including mobile phones) from their bedroom at night. It also helps children stay trim if they sleep well. It's been shown that children who don't have the recommended amount of sleep are more likely to be overweight. The less children sleep, the greater the risk of them becoming obese. Lack of sleep can also affect their mood and behaviour. Find out how much sleep children need according to their age. How screens impair children's sleep. Sleep tips for children. Hidden causes of weight gain. If your child has a medical condition, the advice in this article may not be relevant and you should check with their GP or hospital doctor first. Page last reviewed: 05\/10\/2015 Next review due: 05\/10\/2017 More articles on: Child health 6-15 Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 62 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Exercise for children: football Exercise for children: hiking Exercise for children: kickboxing National Child Measurement Programme External links British Dietetic Association: weight advice for teens Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html Overweight children aged 2-5 Find out how a healthy diet and exercise can help your child reach a healthier weight Very overweight children: advice for parents Practical advice for parents of very overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and suitable physical activity Find the sport that's right for you Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Very overweight children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/childhealth6-15\/Pages\/child-health-measurement-programme-very-overweight-advice.aspx","content":"Very overweight children: advice for parents - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories What can I do if my child is very overweight? Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus If your child is very overweight, there's lots you can do to help them become a healthy weight as they grow. Weight checks Every so often, check whether your child is moving into a healthy weight range with our Healthy weight calculator. Very overweight children tend to grow up to be very overweight adults, which can lead to health problems such as type 2 diabetes, heart disease and certain cancers. Research shows children who achieve a healthy weight tend to be fitter, healthier, better able to learn, and are more self-confident. They're also less likely to have low self-esteem and be bullied. As a parent, there's lots you can do to help your child become a healthier weight. Getting them to be more active and eat well is important. Here's practical advice to help you. Listen to your child's concern about their weight. Overweight children often know they have a weight problem, and they need to feel supported and in control of their weight. Let them know that you love them, whatever their weight, and that all you want is for them to be healthy and happy. Steps for success Medical help If your child is very overweight, or if they have other health conditions, it\u2019s a good idea to ask for support. See suggested support networks at the bottom of the page. Here are five key ways to help your child achieve a healthy weight. You can read this whole page or click on the links below to go directly to the topic you want to know about: Be a good role model  Encourage 60 minutes of physical activity a day  Keep to child-size portions  Eat healthy meals, drinks and snacks  Less screen time and more sleep!  If your child has a medical condition, the advice in this article may not be relevant. You should check with their GP or hospital doctor first. Be a good role model One of the best ways to instil good habits in your child is to be a good role model. Children learn by example. One of the most powerful ways to enourage your child to be active and eat well is to do so yourself. Set a good example by going for a walk or bike ride instead of watching TV or surfing the internet. Playing in the park or swimming with your children shows them being active is fun. Any changes you make to your child's diet and lifestyle are much more likely to be accepted if the changes are small and involve the whole family. Here are 10 ways to get healthy as a family. If you're not sure what activities you'd like to try as a family, use this What's your sport? tool to find out what you're best suited to. Get active Very overweight children don't need to do more exercise than slimmer children. Their extra body weight means they will naturally burn more calories for the same activity. All children need about 60 minutes of physical activity a day for good health, but it doesn't need to be all at once. Several short 10-minute or even five-minute bursts of activity throughout the day can be just as good as an hour-long stretch. For younger children it can take the form of active play, such as ball games, chasing games like \"it\" and \"tag\", riding a scooter, and using playground swings, climbing frames and see-saws. For older children it could include riding a bike, skateboarding, walking to school, skipping, swimming, dancing and martial arts. If your child isn't used to being active, encourage them to start with what they can do and build up to 60 minutes a day. They're more likely to stick to their new activity levels if you let them choose the type of activity they're comfortable with. Walking or cycling short distances instead of using the car or bus is a great way to be active together as a family \u2013 and you'll save money, too. Find out the amount and type of physical activity recommended for under-5s. Find out the amount and type of physical activity recommended for children and young people aged 5 to 18. Join Change4Life for free and your child will get their own personalised activity plan full of good ideas for getting moving. Child-size portions Try to avoid feeding your child large portions. A good rule of thumb is to start meals with small servings and let your child ask for more if they're still hungry. Try not to make your child finish everything on the plate or eat more than they want to. And avoid using adult-size plates for younger children as it encourages them to eat oversized portions. Beware of high-calorie foods. Calories are a measure of the energy in food \u2013 knowing how many calories your child consumes each day, and balancing that with the amount of energy they use up in activity, will help them reach and stay at a healthy weight. This article helps you and your child understand calories. Keep track of your child's daily calorie intake with MyFitnessPal's free online calorie counter (also available as an app). Find out how many calories children aged 7 to 10 need and how many calories teenagers need. Explain to your child how to get the balance of their diet right using the eatwell guide \u2013 it shows how much they should eat from each food group. Read more about what counts as a balanced diet. Get ideas for healthy packed lunches. Eat healthy meals Children, just like adults, should aim to eat five or more portions of fruit and vegetables everyday. They're a great source of fibre and vitamins and minerals. Getting 5 A DAY shouldn't be too difficult. Almost all fruit and vegetables count towards your child's 5 A DAY, including fresh, tinned, frozen and dried. Juices, smoothies, beans and pulses also count. Be aware though that unsweetened 100% fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies can only ever count as a maximum of one portion of their 5 A DAY. For example, if they have two glasses of fruit juice and a smoothie in one day, that still only counts as one portion.  Their combined total of drinks from fruit juice, vegetable juice and smoothies should not be more than 150ml a day \u2013 which is a small glass. For example, if they have 150ml of orange juice and 150ml smoothie in one day, they\u2019ll have exceeded the recommendation by 150ml. When fruit is blended or juiced, it releases the sugars which increases the risk of tooth decay so it\u2019s best to drink fruit juice or smoothies at mealtimes. Discourage your child from having sugary or high-fat foods like sweets, cakes, biscuits, some sugary cereals, and sugar-sweetened soft and fizzy drinks. These foods and drinks tend to be high in calories and low in nutrients. Aim for your child to get most of their calories from healthier foods such as fruit and vegetables, and starchy foods like bread, potatoes, pasta and rice (preferably wholemeal). And switch sweetened drinks for water. Fussy eater? Not a problem with these tips to help your kids enjoy their 5 A DAY. Tasty 5 A DAY family-friendly recipes. Find out more about healthy drinks for children. Swap high-fat foods for these healthier alternatives. Try these sugar swaps \u2013 healthier swaps for breakfast, snacks and puddings. Ideas for sugar swaps when you shop. Less screen time and more sleep! Help your children avoid sitting and lying around too much, as it makes it more likely for them to put on weight. Limit the amount of time your child spends on inactive pastimes such as watching television, playing video games and playing on electronic devices. There's no hard and fast advice on how much is too much, but experts advise children should watch no more than two hours of television each day \u2013 and remove all screens (including mobile phones) from their bedroom at night. It also helps children stay trim if they sleep well. It's been shown that children who don't have the recommended amount of sleep are more likely to be overweight. The less children sleep, the greater the risk of them becoming obese. Lack of sleep can also affect their mood and behaviour. Find out how much sleep children need according to their age. How screens impair children's sleep. Sleep tips for children. Hidden causes of weight gain. Getting support If you've received a letter about your child's weight after they were measured at school, you can use the contact number on the letter to speak to a health worker and get more information about what you can do and what support is available in your area. Your GP or practice nurse can give you further advice. They also may be able to refer you to a local weight management programme for children, such as those run by MEND and More Life.  These programmes are often free to attend through your local health authority, and typically involve a series of weekly group workshop sessions with other parents and their children. You'll learn more about the diet and lifestyle changes that can help your child achieve a healthy weight.  Page last reviewed: 05\/10\/2015 Next review due: 05\/10\/2017 More articles on: Child health 6-15 Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 34 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hidden causes of weight gain How many soft or fizzy drinks can children have each day? External links British Dietetic Association: weight advice for teens Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html 'I weighed 70kg at 11' Chris Bennington, 14, lost more than a stone when he swapped pizza and chips for healthy alternatives Health and fitness Boost your health and fitness with fun and practical ideas to get active and improve your general health Healthy eating Information on how to achieve a balanced diet, tips to help you get your 5 A DAY, plus advice for vegetarians Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ovulation pain","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/ovulation-pain","content":"Ovulation pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ovulation pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ovulation pain   Some women get a one-sided pain in their lower abdomen when they ovulate. Also known as mittelschmerz (German for \"middle pain\" or \"pain in the middle of the month\") it happens about 14 days before your period when an ovary releases an egg as part of the menstrual cycle. Ovulation pain is often normal and just another side effect linked with menstruation. Symptoms of ovulation pain The pain can be a dull cramp or a sharp and sudden twinge. It\u2019s usually on either the left or right hand side of your tummy depending on which ovary is releasing the egg. It can last just a few minutes or continue for a day or two. Some women notice a little vaginal bleeding when it happens. When to see your doctor If the pain is severe or you\u2019re worried, see your GP. It\u2019s a good idea to keep a diary before your visit  so you can let the doctor know exactly when during your menstrual cycle the pain comes on and how long it lasts. Treatments for painful ovulation Painful ovulation can usually be eased by simple remedies like soaking in a hot bath or taking an over-the-counter painkiller, such as paracetamol. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen may also help, but you should not take them if you're trying to get pregnant as they can interfere with ovulation. If you're in a lot of discomfort, talk to your GP about other treatment options. Birth control methods that stop ovulation, such as the combined contraceptive pill or contraceptive implant can completely banish ovulation pain. Is ovulation pain anything to worry about? Painful ovulation is fairly common and usually harmless. It can sometimes though be a symptom of an underlying medical condition. Some of the underlying causes can result in fertility problems that can prevent you from getting pregnant: Endometriosis \u2013 is an inflammatory disease that affects the ovaries and fallopian tubes. It can also cause pain during ovulation. Scar tissue \u2013 if you've had surgery, for example a Caesarean section or your appendix out \u2013 scar tissue can cause ovulation pain by restricting the ovaries and surrounding structures. Sexually transmitted infections \u2013 STIs such as chlamydia can cause inflammation and scarring around the fallopian tubes, leading to ovulation pain. Why does ovulation pain happen? No-one is sure but one theory is that the pain is the egg breaking through the ovary wall, which releases a small amount of fluid or sometimes a small amount of blood that irritates nearby nerves. Page last reviewed: 26\/07\/2016 Next review due: 26\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful How to tackle problem periods Symptoms and treatments of period problems, including painful or heavy periods, endometriosis and PMS Menstrual cycle: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how the menstrual cycle works. Media last reviewed: 21\/02\/2015 Next review due: 21\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Painful periods NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Oxygen treatment, home","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/home-oxygen","content":""}]}