{"conditions":[{"name":"Warfarin","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Anticoagulants-warfarin-","content":"Warfarin - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Warfarin  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anticoagulants-warfarin- Clinical trials Anticoagulants, warfarin   Warfarin is the main oral anticoagulant used in the UK. Oral means it's taken by mouth. An anticoagulant is a medicine that stops blood clotting. Clotting (thickening) is a complex process involving a number of substances called clotting factors. Clotting factors are produced by the liver and help control bleeding. They work with cells that trigger the clotting process (platelets) to ensure blood clots effectively. To produce some of the clotting factors, the liver needs a good supply of vitamin K. Warfarin blocks one of the enzymes (proteins) that uses vitamin K to produce clotting factors. This disrupts the clotting process, making it take longer for the blood to clot. This page covers: When warfarin is prescribed Taking warfarin Side effects of warfarin Interactions Other useful information When warfarin is prescribed Anticoagulant medicines, such as warfarin, are often prescribed for people who've had a condition caused by a blood clot, such as: a stroke a heart attack deep vein thrombosis \u2013 a blood clot within a deep vein in the body, usually in a leg pulmonary embolism \u2013 a blood clot in the lungs Warfarin may also be prescribed for people at an increased risk of developing harmful blood clots, such as those with: a replacement or mechanical (prosthetic) heart valve an irregular heart rhythm, known as atrial fibrillation a blood clotting disorder, such as thrombophilia an increased risk of blood clots following surgery Taking warfarin It's very important that you take warfarin exactly as directed. Don't increase your prescribed dose unless the doctor in charge of your care advises you to. Warfarin is taken once a day, usually in the evening. It's important to take your dose at the same time each day, before, during or after a meal. The aim of warfarin therapy is to decrease the blood's tendency to clot, but not stop it clotting completely. This means the dose of warfarin you're taking must be carefully monitored and, if necessary, adjusted. You'll have regular blood tests at your GP surgery or local anticoagulant clinic to make sure your dose is correct. The international normalised ratio (INR) is a measure of how long it takes your blood to clot.  The longer it takes your blood to clot, the higher your INR. Your INR will be used to determine the dose of warfarin you need to take. Although there are now three new anticoagulants that don't require regular monitoring \u2013 rivaroxaban, apixaban and dabigatran \u2013 most people who need an anticoagulant will be prescribed warfarin. When you start taking warfarin, you may be given a yellow booklet about anticoagulants, which explains your treatment. How long you'll need to take warfarin for will depend on the condition for which it's been prescribed. Ask the healthcare professional responsible for your care if you're not sure. Missed doses If you usually take warfarin in the morning and forget to take it at your normal time, take it as soon as you remember and continue as normal. However, if it's time to take your next dose, don't take a double dose to catch up, unless your GP has specifically advised you to. If you forget to take your dose of warfarin in the evening but remember before midnight on the same day, take the missed dose. If midnight has passed, leave that dose and take your normal dose the next day at the usual time. Ask your GP or staff at your local anticoagulant clinic if you're not sure what to do about a missed dose of warfarin. You can also call NHS 111 for advice. Who shouldn't take warfarin The following people shouldn't take warfarin: pregnant women \u2013 it can affect the development of the baby people with uncontrolled high blood pressure (severe hypertension) people with a high risk of internal bleeding \u2013 for example, those with a stomach ulcer people with a bleeding disorder \u2013 such as haemophilia Side effects of warfarin Bleeding is the main side effect associated with warfarin, as it slows down the blood's normal clotting ability. You're at greatest risk of bleeding in the first few weeks of starting treatment with warfarin and when you're unwell. You should therefore seek medical attention if you: pass blood in your urine or faeces pass black faeces have severe bruising have long nosebleeds \u2013 lasting more than 10 minutes have bleeding gums cough up blood or have blood in your vomit experience unusual headaches have heavy or increased bleeding during your period, or any other bleeding from your vagina (in women) Take extra care to avoid cutting yourself while taking anticoagulant medication because of the risk of excessive bleeding. For example, you should: take care when shaving and brushing your teeth wear protective clothing when gardening, sewing or playing contact sports use insect repellent to avoid insect bites or stings Seek urgent medical attention if you're taking warfarin and you: have a fall or accident experience a significant blow to your head are unable to stop any bleeding have signs of bleeding, such as bruising Skin rashes and hair loss are also common side effects of warfarin. Contact your GP or the healthcare specialist responsible for your care if you experience any persistent side effects while taking warfarin. Interactions Medicines Warfarin can interact with many other medicines. The patient information leaflet that comes with a medicine should tell you if it's safe to take with warfarin. Ask your GP or pharmacist if you're unsure. When taking warfarin: don't take aspirin, or treatments containing aspirin, unless it's prescribed by a healthcare professional as it could cause bleeding  don't take ibuprofen unless it's prescribed by a healthcare professional you can take paracetamol, but don't take more than the recommended dose Herbal medicines and supplements can also interact with warfarin. You should therefore avoid taking them without first checking with your GP, pharmacist, or staff at your local anticoagulant clinic. Food and drink Some food and drink can interfere with the effect of warfarin if consumed in large amounts, including foods that are rich in vitamin K. Foods containing large amounts of vitamin K include: green leafy vegetables, such as broccoli and spinach vegetable oils cereal grains Small amounts of vitamin K can also be found in meat and dairy foods. When your first dose of warfarin is prescribed, it doesn't matter how much vitamin K you're eating because the dosage will be based on your current blood clotting levels. However, if you make significant changes to your diet, such as increasing your vitamin K intake or cutting out foods that contain vitamin K, it could interfere with how warfarin works. Consult the healthcare professional responsible for your care before making any significant changes to your diet while taking warfarin. They'll also be able to give you more information about foods to avoid or limit. Alcohol Getting drunk or binge drinking is dangerous while taking warfarin. It may increase the effect of the drug, increasing the risk of bleeding. The latest guidelines on drinking alcohol state that regularly drinking more than 14 units of alcohol a week (for both men and women) risks damaging your health. Fourteen units is equivalent to six pints of average-strength beer or 10 small glasses of low-strength wine. Read more about units of alcohol. Heavy drinkers or people with liver disease who are taking warfarin shouldn't drink alcohol. Other useful information Surgery and dental work Because of the risk of bleeding, your dose of warfarin may need to be lowered or stopped a few days before having an operation or dental work. Tell the surgeon or dentist that you're taking warfarin. You should also tell anyone else involved with your care, such as an anticoagulant nurse, if you need an operation so they can make arrangements. Having vaccinations You can have vaccinations while taking warfarin, but all injections must: be given under the skin not be given into the muscle as it may cause bruising  have firm pressure applied to the site for 10 minutes afterwards  Playing sports You can play sports while taking warfarin, but because of the risk of bleeding: contact sports that could lead to a head injury, such as football, rugby, cricket and hockey, are best avoided if played competitively martial arts and kickboxing must be avoided You can continue to take part in non-contact sports, such as running, athletics, cycling and racquet sports. However, make sure you wear protective clothing, such as a cycle helmet. Going on holiday Tell your GP or anticoagulant nurse if you're going on holiday, in this country or abroad, and arrange to have your INR checked before you go. If you're going to be away longer than a month, you may need to arrange to have your INR checked while you're away. Make sure you have enough warfarin tablets to last for the duration of your trip. Body piercings Body piercings aren't recommended while taking warfarin because of the increased risk of bleeding and risk of infection. Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 722 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 315  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 221  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anticoagulants Blood clots Medicines information Paracetamol and warfarin External links British Heart Foundation (BHF): warfarin Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) Yellow Card Scheme Pharmacy and medicines Using your local pharmacy's services could save you an unnecessary trip to your GP Medicine regulation The Yellow Card Scheme, run by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), allows you to report suspected side effects from any type of medicine you're taking Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Warts and verrucas","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Warts","content":"Warts and verrucas - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Warts and verrucas  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Warts Clinical trials Warts Community Warts and verrucas Warts Symptoms Warts Causes Warts Treatment Warts Prevention Introduction  Warts are small lumps that often develop on the skin of the hands and feet. Warts vary in appearance and may develop singly or in clusters. Some are more likely to affect particular areas of the body. For example, verrucas are warts that usually develop on the soles of the feet. Warts are non-cancerous, but can resemble certain cancers. Most people will have warts at some point in their life. They tend to affect children and teenagers more than adults. Read more about the symptoms of warts. What causes warts? Warts are caused by an infection with the human papilloma virus (HPV). The virus causes an excess amount of keratin, a hard protein, to develop in the top skin layer (epidermis). The extra keratin produces the rough, hard texture of a wart. Read more about the causes of warts. Are warts contagious? Warts aren't considered very contagious, but they can be caught by close skin-to-skin contact. The infection can also be transmitted indirectly from contaminated objects or surfaces, such as the area surrounding a swimming pool. You are more likely to get infected if your skin is wet or damaged. After you become infected, it can take weeks or even months for a wart or verruca to appear. When to see your GP Most types of warts are easy to identify because they have a distinctive appearance. You should always see your GP if you have a growth on your skin you are unable to identify or are worried about. Your GP will be able to tell if it's a wart simply by looking at it. Where it is on your body and how it affects surrounding skin will also be taken into consideration. You should visit your GP if you have a wart that: bleeds changes in appearance spreads causes you significant pain, distress or embarrassment Treating warts Most warts are harmless and clear up without treatment. The length of time it takes a wart to disappear will vary from person to person. It may take up to two years for the viral infection to leave your system and for the wart to disappear. You might decide to treat your wart if it is painful, or in an area that is causing discomfort or embarrassment. Common methods of treatment include: salicylic acid cryotherapy (freezing the skin cells) duct tape chemical treatments Treatment for warts is not always completely effective, and a wart will sometimes return following treatment. Surgery is not usually recommended for warts. Read more about how warts are treated. Warts are small non-cancerous lumps that often appear on the hands and feet  Genital warts Genital warts are small, fleshy growths that develop around the genital or anal area. In England, genital warts are the most common viral sexually transmitted infection (STI). Like other types of warts, genital warts are caused by the human papilloma virus (HPV). They can be spread during sex. Read more about genital warts. Page last reviewed: 11\/09\/2014 Next review due: 11\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 543 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 161  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Foot health Skin care Genital warts Find foot health services External links British Association of Dermatologists: verrucas (PDF, 227kb) British Association of Dermatologists: cryotherapy (PDF, 262kb) College of Podiatry: verrucas Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Warts, genital","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/genital_warts","content":"Genital warts - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Genital warts  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Genital_warts Community Genital warts Genital_warts Symptoms Genital_warts Causes Genital_warts Diagnosis Genital_warts Treatment Genital_warts Prevention Introduction  Genital warts are small fleshy growths, bumps or skin changes that appear on or around the genital or anal area. Genital warts are very common. In England, they are the second most common type of sexually transmitted infection (STI) after chlamydia. Genital warts are the result of a viral skin infection caused by the human papilloma virus (HPV). They are usually painless and do not pose a serious threat to health. But they can be unpleasant to look at and cause psychological distress. There is no evidence that your fertility will be affected by genital warts. Read more about the symptoms of genital warts. The human papilloma virus (HPV) The HPV is not a single virus, but a family of more than 100 different strains of viruses. Different strains usually affect different parts of the body, including the hands or feet. Although around 30 different types of HPV can affect the genital skin, most cases of infection with HPV cause no visible symptoms. Around 90% of all cases of genital warts are caused by two strains of the virus \u2013 type 6 and type 11. The types of HPV that cause visible genital warts do not cause genital cancer. Other strains of HPV can cause cervical cancer. How do they spread? Genital warts can be spread during vaginal or anal sex, and by sharing sex toys. But you don't need to have penetrative sex to pass the infection on because HPV is spread by skin-to-skin contact. Read more about the causes of genital warts. It can take months, or even years, for warts to develop after infection with HPV. So if you're in a relationship and you get genital warts, it does not necessarily mean your partner has been having sex with other people. HPV is most likely to be transmitted to others when warts are present, although it is still possible to pass the virus on before the warts have developed and after they have disappeared. Condoms do not provide complete protection because it is possible for the skin around your genital area not covered by the condom to become infected. Read more about preventing genital warts. Treating genital warts If you think you have genital warts, see a health professional as they may need to be treated. It is possible to have more than one STI at a time, so if you think you have warts, it is a good idea to have a check-up. You can make an appointment at your local sexual health or genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic. You can go to a sexual health clinic whatever age you are. If you're under 16, the service is still confidential and the clinic won't tell your parents. Find your local sexual health or GUM clinic. The treatment for genital warts depends on how many warts you have and where they are. Several treatments are available, such as liquids or creams and freezing the warts (cryotherapy). You should not use wart creams that are available over the counter because they are designed to only treat warts on the hands or verrucas. If you are diagnosed with genital warts, it is recommended you do not have sex, including anal and oral sex, until your genital warts have fully healed. This will help prevent you passing the infection on to others. It will also help speed up your recovery. Learn more in treating genital warts. Will the warts come back? Some people only ever get one episode of genital warts. For many others, the warts will come back weeks, months or years later. If you do develop a new wart, it is not possible to say if these are a result of the original infection or a new infection with HPV. Who is affected? Both men and women can be affected by genital warts. According to Public Health England, in 2012 there were 73,893 new cases of genital warts diagnosed by GUM clinics in England. This compares with 206,912 new cases of chlamydia in 2012. Genital warts are most common in sexually active teenagers and young adults. The highest rates of genital warts occur in men aged 20 to 24 years and women aged 16 to 19 years. HPV vaccinations HPV vaccines in the UK are offered to all girls in year 8 (aged 12 to 13 years). Since September 2012, the vaccine Gardasil has been used and can help protect against HPV types 6 and 11, which cause around 90% of genital warts. It also protects against types 16 and 18, which are linked to more than 70% of cases of cervical cancer in the UK. Before September 2012, a different vaccine called Cervarix was used to protect against HPV types 16 and 18. HPV vaccines cannot protect against all types of HPV. If you are a woman and have received HPV vaccinations, you should still attend cervical screening (smear tests) as the vaccines do not guarantee that you will not develop cervical cancer in the future. Read more about cervical screening. Page last reviewed: 22\/08\/2014 Next review due: 22\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 368 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 187  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Genital herpes HPV vaccination STIs Sexual health Talking about sex Teen boys health Teen girls health Find services: sexual health External links Sex: worth talking about FPA: genital warts Brook: advice for under 25s Lab Tests Online UK: genital warts Safer sex on holiday Protect yourself from a sexually transmitted infection or unplanned pregnancy on holiday What happens at an STI clinic What to expect at an STI clinic, including tests, treatment, and the questions you may be asked Need help now? Where to get sexual health help urgently, including advice about what to do after unprotected sex or sexual assault Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Wasp stings","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Bites-insect","content":"Insect bites and stings - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Insect bites and stings  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Bites-insect Clinical trials Insect bites and stings Bites-insect Symptoms Bites-insect Treatment Bites-insect Prevention   Most insect bites and stings are not serious and will get better within a few hours or days. But occasionally they can become infected, cause a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) or spread serious illnesses such as Lyme disease and malaria. Bugs that bite or sting include wasps, hornets, bees, horseflies, ticks, mosquitoes, fleas, bedbugs, spiders and midges. This page covers: Symptoms What to do if you've been bitten or stung When to get medical advice When to get emergency medical help Prevention Symptoms of insect bites and stings Insect bites and stings will usually cause a red, swollen lump to develop on the skin. This may be painful and in some cases can be very itchy. The symptoms will normally improve within a few hours or days, although sometimes they can last a little longer. Some people have a mild allergic reaction and a larger area of skin around the bite or sting becomes swollen, red and painful. This should pass within a week. Occasionally, a severe allergic reaction can occur, causing symptoms such as breathing difficulties, dizziness and a swollen face or mouth. This requires immediate medical treatment (see below). Read more about the symptoms of common insect bites and stings. What to do if you've been bitten or stung To treat an insect bite or sting: Remove the sting or tick if it's still in the skin (see treating insect bites and stings for advice about how to do this safely). Wash the affected area with soap and water. Apply a cold compress (such as a flannel or cloth cooled with cold water) or an ice pack to any swelling for at least 10 minutes. Raise or elevate the affected area if possible, as this can help reduce swelling. Avoid scratching the area, to reduce the risk of infection. Avoid traditional home remedies, such as vinegar and bicarbonate of soda, as they're unlikely to help. The pain, swelling and itchiness can sometimes last a few days. Ask your pharmacist about over-the-counter treatments that can help, such as painkillers, creams for itching and antihistamines. Read more about treatments for insect bites and stings. When to get medical advice Contact your GP or call NHS 111 for advice if: you're worried about a bite or sting your symptoms don't start to improve within a few days or are getting worse you've been stung or bitten in your mouth or throat, or near your eyes a large area (around 10cm or more) around the bite becomes red and swollen you have symptoms of a wound infection, such as pus or increasing pain, swelling or redness you have symptoms of a more widespread infection, such as a fever, swollen glands and other flu-like symptoms When to get emergency medical help Dial 999 for an ambulance immediately if you or someone else has symptoms of a severe reaction, such as: wheezing or difficulty breathing a swollen face, mouth or throat nausea or vomiting a fast heart rate dizziness or feeling faint difficulty swallowing loss of consciousness Emergency treatment in hospital is needed in these cases. Prevent insect bites and stings There are some simple precautions you can take to reduce your risk of being bitten or stung by insects. For example, you should: Remain calm and move away slowly if you encounter wasps, hornets or bees \u2013 don't wave your arms around or swat at them. Cover exposed skin by wearing long sleeves and trousers. Wear shoes when outdoors. Apply insect repellent to exposed skin \u2013 repellents that contain 50% DEET (diethyltoluamide) are most effective. Avoid using products with strong perfumes, such as soaps, shampoos and deodorants \u2013 these can attract insects. Be careful around flowering plants, rubbish, compost, stagnant water, and in outdoor areas where food is served. You may need to take extra precautions if you're travelling to part of the world where there's a risk of serious illnesses. For example, you may be advised to take antimalarial tablets to help prevent malaria. Read more about how to prevent insect bites and stings. Page last reviewed: 01\/07\/2016 Next review due: 01\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 751 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 233  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 92  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 208  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Lyme disease Malaria Bedbugs Allergies External links NHS Fit for Travel: destination advice Plant dangers in the garden and countryside Keep your family safe with this guide to plant hazards, and find out what to do if someone is affected Malaria Approximately 1,500 travellers return to the UK with malaria every year. Find out more about the symptoms and causes, and how you can protect yourself NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Watering eyes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Watering-eye","content":"Watering eyes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Watering eyes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Watering-eye Clinical trials Watering eye Watering-eye Treatment Introduction  Watering eyes occur if too many tears are produced or if they cannot drain away properly. The problem can affect anyone, but it's most common in young babies and people older than 60. It can cause blurred vision, sore eyelids and sticky eyes. See your GP or optician if you have persistent watering eyes or any lumps or swelling around your eyes. What causes watering eyes? A problem with the glands Glands in the eyelids (Meibomian glands) normally secrete an oily substance that slows the evaporation of tears between blinks. When these glands don't function properly, known as Meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD), it can result in dry patches on your eyes. These become sore, and extra tears are produced as a reflex. This is the most likely cause of watering eyes. Other causes Other problems that can cause extra tears to be produced include: the lower eyelid sagging away from the eye (ectropion) \u2013 this makes it difficult for tears to reach the drainage ducts eyelids that roll inwards (entropion) inflammation of the edges of the eyelids (blepharitis) blocked or narrowed tear ducts eye irritation (for example, from chemical fumes or grit) an eye infection, such as conjunctivitis an allergy How are watering eyes investigated and treated? Your GP may refer you to an optometrist (eye specialist) for an examination, if no obvious reason for your watering eye can be found. Investigating the cause If necessary, you may then be referred to an ophthalmologist (eye surgeon) for further investigation. An ophthalmologist will look for blockages in your tear ducts, using local anaesthetic eye drops to help reduce any discomfort. This involves inserting a tiny probe into the narrow drainage channels on the inside of your eyelid to determine whether they are blocked. Fluid may also be injected into your tear duct, to see whether it comes out normally. Another test involves placing a drop of special dye in each eye. If there is a significant amount left in your eyes after five minutes of normal blinking, your tear ducts may be blocked. Scans of your tear ducts may sometimes be carried out. These can involve either injecting or placing special dyes into the tear ducts and then taking X-rays or other scans to help pinpoint the location of the blockage. Treatment If you're producing extra tears as a result of dry eye syndrome, you may be offered lubricating eye drops and advised to avoid activities that aggravate your symptoms. Medication may be needed if the cause is an allergy or infection, and surgery may be needed if a tear duct is blocked. If watering eyes aren't interfering with your life, you may choose not to have treatment. Read more about treating watering eyes.  Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery Page last reviewed: 01\/04\/2015 Next review due: 01\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 473 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Ectropion Eye injuries Conjunctivitis Eyelid problems External links Easy Health: eye problems The Eyecare Trust: eye conditions The Royal College of Ophthalmologists: patient information Moorfields Eye Hospital: eye health Eye safety Injury or damage to the eye can be extremely painful and may permanently affect your eyesight NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Weaning","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/solid-foods-weaning.aspx","content":"Your baby's first solid foods - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your baby's first solid foods Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. When should I introduce my baby to solid foods? Media last reviewed: 28\/01\/2015 Next review due: 28\/01\/2017 When to start introducing solid foods Introducing your baby to solid foods \u2013 sometimes called weaning or complementary feeding \u2013 should start when your baby is around six months old. It's a really important step in their development, and it can be great fun to explore new flavours and textures together. To begin with, how much your baby takes is less important than getting them used to the idea of eating. They will still be getting most of their nutrition from breast milk or infant formula.  Babies don't need three meals a day to start with, so you can begin by offering foods at a time that suits you both. Gradually, you'll be able to increase the amount and variety of food your baby eats, until they can eventually eat the same as the rest of the family, in smaller portions. Why it pays to wait until they're ready Research shows babies can get all the nutrients they need from breast milk or infant formula until they are around six months old. Waiting till then gives their digestive system time to develop fully so it can cope with solid foods. This includes solid foods made into purées and cereals added to milk. If you are breastfeeding, having breast milk alone up to the age of six months will protect your baby against infections. Breast milk will carry on protecting them from infections for as long as you carry on feeding. Whether your baby has breast milk or infant formula, waiting until they are ready for food will save a lot of time, too. They'll quickly be able to feed themselves and with less mess, as they will be able to swallow properly. Three signs your baby is ready for their first food Every baby is an individual, but there are three clear signs that, together, show your baby is ready for solid foods alongside breast milk or formula. It's very rare for these signs to appear together before your baby is six months old. 1. They can stay in a sitting position and hold their head steady. 2. They can co-ordinate their eyes, hands and mouth so they can look at the food, pick it up and put it in their mouth, all by themselves. 3. They can swallow food. Babies who are not ready will push their food back out with their tongue, so they get more round their face than they do in their mouths. Some signs that can be mistaken for a baby being ready for solid foods: chewing fists waking in the night when they have previously slept through wanting extra milk feeds These are normal behaviours and not necessarily a sign of hunger or being ready to start solid food. Starting solid foods won't make them any more likely to sleep through the night. Extra feeds are usually enough until they're ready for other food. Getting started with solid foods Always stay with your baby when they are eating in case they start to choke. Find out how to help a choking child. Let your baby enjoy touching and holding the food. Allow your baby to feed themselves, using their fingers, as soon as they show an interest. Don't force your baby to eat \u2013 wait until the next time if they're not interested this time. If you're using a spoon, wait for your baby to open their mouth before you offer the food. Your baby may like to hold a spoon, too. Start by offering just a few pieces or teaspoons of food, once a day. Cool hot food and test it before giving it to your baby. Don't add salt, sugar or stock cubes to your baby's food or cooking water. See what other foods to avoid giving your baby. What foods to give your baby as they grow Feeding your baby from 0-6 months Your baby only needs breast milk or first infant formula. \"Follow-on\" formula isn't suitable for babies under six months, and you don't need to introduce it after six months either. Check with your health visitor or GP first if you want to introduce solid foods before six months. Babies and food allergies While variety in your baby's diet is really important, there is a chance they may be allergic to certain foods. That's why it's important to introduce cows' milk, eggs, wheat, gluten, nuts, peanuts, peanut products, seeds, fish and shellfish one at a time and not before six months. There is no evidence that waiting until your child is older will prevent them developing a food allergy. Once your baby is ready for solids, give them these foods in very small amounts and watch carefully for any symptoms of an allergic reaction. If your baby already has a known allergy, such as a diagnosed food allergy or eczema, or you have a family history of food allergies, eczema, asthma or hay fever, you may need to be particularly careful when introducing peanuts and peanut products. Talk to your GP or health visitor first. Remember, peanuts, like all nuts, should be crushed or ground. See more about food allergies in babies and toddlers. Baby food from 6 months First foods Your baby's first foods can include mashed or soft cooked fruit and vegetables like parsnip, potato, yam, sweet potato, carrot, apple or pear, all cooled before eating. Soft fruits like peach or melon, or baby rice or baby cereal mixed with your baby's usual milk, are good as well. Keep feeding your baby breast milk or infant formula, too, but don't give them whole cows' milk as a drink until they are one year old. Finger foods Finger food is food that is cut up into pieces big enough for your baby to hold in their fist with a bit sticking out. Pieces about the size of your own finger work well. Your baby learns to chew this way. Try grabbable bits of soft, ripe banana or avocado. Next foods  Once your baby is used to the foods above, they can have soft cooked meat such as chicken, mashed fish (check very carefully for any bones), pasta, noodles, toast, pieces of chapatti, lentils, rice and mashed hard-boiled eggs. They can also have full-fat dairy products such as yoghurt, fromage frais or custard. Choose products with no added sugar or less sugar. Whole cows' milk can be used in cooking or mixed with food from six months. Cups Introduce a cup from around six months and offer sips of water with meals. Using an open cup or a free-flow cup without a valve will help your baby learn to sip and is better for their teeth. See more about cups for babies and toddlers. Vitamins The Department of Health recommends that all under-fives are given vitamin supplements containing vitamins A, C and D every day.  Babies who are having more than 500ml (about a pint) of infant formula a day shouldn't be given vitamin supplements because formula is already fortified with nutrients. Read more about vitamins for babies and toddlers. Feeding your baby from 8-9 months Your baby will gradually move towards eating three meals a day. It will be a mixture of soft finger foods, and mashed or chopped foods. Your baby's diet should consist of a variety of the following: fruit and vegetables; bread, rice, pasta, potatoes and other starchy foods; meat, fish, eggs, beans and other non-dairy sources of protein; and milk and dairy products. See advice on portion size (PDF, 3.6Mb) from First Steps Nutrition. Your baby's food from 12 months Your baby will now be eating three meals a day, chopped if necessary, plus breast milk or whole cows' milk and healthier snacks like fruit, vegetable sticks, toast and rice cakes. They can now drink whole cows' milk. Choose full-fat dairy products as children under two need the extra fat and vitamins found in them. From two years old, if they are a good eater and growing well, they can have semi-skimmed milk. From five years old, 1% fat and skimmed milk is OK. You can give your baby: three to four servings a day of starchy food such as potatoes, bread and rice three to four servings a day of fruit and vegetables two servings a day of meat, fish, eggs, dhal or other pulses (beans and lentils) Read more about what to feed young children. What milk, when? For around the first six months you should feed your baby only breast milk or infant formula. Infant formula made from cows' or goats' milk is the only suitable alternative to breast milk in the first 12 months of your baby's life. Only use soya-based infant formula if your GP has advised you to. Follow-on milks are available for babies over six months, but there is no need to change over to these. Cows' milk can be mixed with food from six months and whole cows' milk can be given as a drink from one year. Semi-skimmed milk can be introduced once your child is two years old, as long as they're a good eater and they have a varied diet. Skimmed and 1% milk aren't suitable for children under five, as they don't contain enough calories. Infant formula, follow-on formula or growing-up milks are not needed once your baby is 12 months old. Goats' and sheep's milk are not suitable as a drink for babies under one year. You can give your child unsweetened calcium-fortified milk alternatives, such as soya, almond and oat drinks, as part of a healthy, balanced diet from the age of one. Toddlers and young children under the age of five should not be given rice drinks because of the levels of arsenic they contain. If your child has an allergy or intolerance to milk, talk to your health visitor or GP. They can advise you on suitable milk alternatives. See more about drinks for babies and toddlers. Page last reviewed: 07\/05\/2015 Next review due: 07\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 392 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 210  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Baby food: common questions Foods to avoid giving to your baby Help your baby enjoy new foods Helping a choking baby Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts External links Bliss: weaning your premature baby British Dietetic Association: weaning (PDF, 328kb) Start4Life: solid foods Tip for new parents Tips for new parents, including how to get breastfeeding off to a good start and how to 'top and tail' or bathe your newborn Teething tips How to help your baby through teething, including advice on gels, teething rings, painkillers and avoiding teething rash Search for services Find parenting and childcare services in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Weber-Christian disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/panniculitis","content":"Panniculitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Panniculitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Panniculitis Introduction  Panniculitis is a broad term refering to inflammation of the fatty layer underneath the skin. It's usually seen in women, on the thighs and lower legs. There are many types of panniculitis \u2013 with different causes \u2013 but the condition generally causes the skin to feel hard and to develop painful red lumps (nodules) or patches (plaques), making it look darker in places. Panniculitis usually affects the shins and calves, but may spread to the thighs, forearms and chest. It tends to clear up within six weeks, fading like a bruise, usually without scarring. When the inflammation has settled, a depression in the skin may be left, which can be temporary or permanent. Many people get recurring bouts of panniculitis. Other symptoms As well as skin symptoms, panniculitis may also be associated with: fever fatigue weight loss nausea and vomiting joint pain What are the causes? There are a wide range of possible causes of panniculitis, although often the cause is not known. Common causes include: an infection \u2013 usually a viral or bacterial infection, but sometimes tuberculosis an inflammatory disease such as Crohn\u2019s disease or ulcerative colitis some medicines, including the oral contraceptive pill or sulphonamides (a group of antibiotics) sarcoidosis \u2013 a rare disease that causes body cells to form into clumps, called granulomas, in the lungs and skin leukaemia (cancer of the white blood cells) or lymphoma (cancer of the lymphatic system, part of your immune system) Some cases of panniculitis may be caused by the body's immune system mistakenly attacking the fat cells. Types of panniculitis The layer of fat underneath the skin is made of lobules (groups of fat cells) held together by connective tissue. Doctors sometimes classify the disease as either: \u2018mostly septal\u2019 \u2013 the inflammation mostly affects the connective tissue \u2018mostly lobular\u2019 \u2013 it mostly affects the fat lobules Some people will also have vasculitis, where the immune system attacks the body's blood vessels. If a blood vessel is inflamed, it can narrow or close off, this can limit, or even prevent, blood flow through the vessel and potentially damage organs. The most common type of panniculitis is erythema nodosum, which affects the shins. In about half of all cases of erythema nodosum, the cause is unknown. A similar form of the disease is Weber-Christian disease, also known as idiopathic lobular panniculitis (idiopathic means \u2018unknown cause\u2019). This most commonly affects the thighs and lower legs of women aged 30-60, and can also cause the non-skin symptoms mentioned above, such as fever and fatigue. Other types include: erythema induratum (nodular vasculitis), which usually affects the calves of young women and is often caused by tuberculosis cold panniculitis, which affects areas of skin exposed to the cold \u2013 for example, it can affect the cheeks and forehead of infants and children subcutaneous sarcoidosis, when the cause is the rare disease sarcoidosis A full list of all the different types of panniculitis can be found on DermNet NZ, which provides pictures and detailed information on the specific types. How is panniculitis treated? Doctors will aim to treat the underlying cause of the panniculitis, if known, and relieve some of the symptoms. While treatment is underway, you will be asked to ensure you get enough rest and to elevate the affected area when possible. Treatments will vary; for example, if panniculitis is triggered by medication, this medicine should be stopped \u2013 but don't stop taking any medication without first speaking to your GP. If the cause is a bacterial infection, you will be prescribed anti-inflammatory antibiotics, such as tetracycline, to clear the infection. If the cause is sarcoidosis, you may not need any medical treatment as the disease often goes away on its own with time (usually a couple of years). Often, simple lifestyle changes, over the counter painkillers, and support bandages are all that is needed to control any flare ups. Read more about managing sarcoidosis.  The following treatments may help to relieve symptoms: Joint pain and painful skin nodules can be relieved with anti-inflammatory painkillers (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen. A solution of potassium iodide may help to relieve symptoms \u2013 this is thought to have an effect on white blood cells (read more about potassium iodide treatment for skin conditions). The inflammation may occasionally be treated with steroid cream, steroid tablets or injections, or immunosuppressants (drugs to weaken the immune system), if the immune system is responsible. If the condition is severe and the above treatments don't help, you may wish to consider surgical removal of particularly bad patches of skin. Your GP will refer you to a dermatologist (skin specialist) to discuss the pros and cons of surgery. Community content from HealthUnlocked Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Page last reviewed: 26\/08\/2014 Next review due: 26\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 74 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links NSAID painkillers External links British Association of Dermatologists Sarcoidosis Everything you need to know about this rare condition, including advice on living with sarcoidosis NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Wegener's granulomatosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/wegeners-granulomatosis","content":"Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's granulomatosis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's granulomatosis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview wegeners-granulomatosis Clinical trials Granulomatosis with polyangiitis Introduction  Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is a rare disease which causes the walls of the blood vessels to become inflamed (swollen). It's a serious condition that can eventually lead to tissue damage and organ failure and can be fatal if left untreated. However, there are effective treatments which mean most people can live relatively normal lives with the condition. Until recently, GPA used to be called Wegener's granulomatosis. Signs and symptoms The inflammation of the blood vessels (known as vasculitis) caused by GPA mainly affects the nose, sinuses, ears, lungs and kidneys, although other organs can be affected too, including the brain, skin, nerves, heart and bowels. This means the condition can have a wide range of symptoms, such as: a persistent unexplained fever night sweats fatigue (extreme tiredness) and weakness a general ill feeling loss of appetite and weight loss joint pain and soreness persistent ear infections and reduced hearing frequent sinusitis recurrent nosebleeds and crusts around the nose chest pain, cough and shortness of breath coughing up blood or blood in the phlegm blood in the urine Some people with GPA may also be at risk of developing blood clots in their legs (deep vein thrombosis) or lungs (pulmonary embolism). When to seek medical advice If you have any of the above symptoms that are persistent or troublesome see your GP. They can arrange appropriate tests if they suspect GPA is the cause and, if appropriate, arrange referral to a specialist centre for treatment. If you have been diagnosed with GPA and suddenly develop any of the above symptoms, see your GP immediately because you are probably experiencing a relapse (return of the condition). What causes GPA? The exact cause of GPA is unknown. It is thought that GPA is likely to be an autoimmune disease, which means the body's immune system mistakenly attacks its own tissues. As with other autoimmune disorders, it's probable that people with GPA have a gene that makes them more likely to develop the condition. GPA is then probably triggered by an additional factor, such as an infection with bacteria or a virus. Genes alone are not responsible for the condition, as it's very unusual for GPA to occur in two people in the same family. Who is affected Around 500 men and women are diagnosed with GPA each year in the UK. Symptoms can start at any age, including in childhood, although the condition usually first appears in middle-aged or elderly people. How GPA is diagnosed Your doctor may suspect GPA if you feel unwell, have a persistent fever and have lost weight, and one or more of the following areas of your body is affected: your nose, ears and sinuses \u2013 for example, you have persistent earache, nosebleeds or sinusitis lungs \u2013 for example, you have difficulty breathing or are coughing up blood, or your chest X-ray shows lung abnormalities kidneys \u2013 for example, there is blood or protein in your urine Blood tests may be done to test levels of ANCAs (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies). These are antibodies thought to be involved in the process that leads to the blood vessels becoming inflamed. However, this test can sometimes come back negative in people with GPA and positive in people who don\u2019t have the condition, so it can't be relied upon on its own to diagnose the condition. A tissue sample of the affected area may also be removed (a biopsy) and looked at under the microscope for evidence of inflammation. In GPA, white blood cells clump together to form tiny lumps called granulomas. Computerised tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans may also be carried out to assess the condition of any organs or areas of the body that may be affected. How GPA is treated The aim of treatment for GPA is firstly to bring the condition under control (known as inducing remission), and then try to prevent the condition relapsing (known as maintaining remission). For most people, this can be achieved using a number of different medications, which may need to be taken for a number of years. Medication administration is supervised through specialist centres in close liaison with your GP and is tailored to each individual patient. Inducing remission To begin with, you will usually need high doses of medication to dampen down your immune system and bring the inflammation under control. Typically, you will be given a steroid medication called prednisolone to reduce the inflammation in addition to a medication called cyclophosphamide, which weakens your immune system. Steroid medication is either given intravenously alongside this, or is taken by mouth (orally) on a daily basis. Cyclophosphamide is normally given intravenously (directly into a vein) every two to three weeks. In milder cases, an alternative oral immune-suppressing medication called methotrexate may be given instead of cyclophosphamide. This treatment will continue \u2013 with your steroid dose gradually reduced over time \u2013 until you achieve remission, which in most people takes around three to six months. Cyclophosphamide and steroids are powerful medications, so make sure you discuss the possible side effects with your doctor. Read more about the side effects of steroid medication. Maintaining remission Once remission is achieved, your treatment with cyclophosphamide will be stopped and you will be given a milder immune-suppressing medication such as methotrexate or azathioprine. Your steroid medication may also be stopped, or you may continue taking it at a low dose. This stage of treatment will usually last between two and five years and will also involve frequent check-ups to look for signs of a relapse. Other treatments Although the medications described above are effective for most people, some people with GPA will need alternative or additional treatment. For example, you may be given long-term treatment with antibiotics alongside your other medications to prevent potentially serious infections, as the medications used to treat GPA can increase your chances of picking up an infection. If you have severe GPA, cyclophosphamide is not suitable for you, or your condition relapses despite therapy, you may be offered a medication called rituximab instead. This medication works by destroying certain cells produced by the immune system that are thought to play a role in the inflammation of the blood vessels. In particularly severe cases affecting the kidneys, a procedure called plasma exchange (plasmapheresis) may be recommended.  During this procedure, you will be connected to a machine that removes some of your blood. A blood component called plasma will then be separated from the blood cells and removed, before the remaining blood cells are returned to your body. This process can remove some of the antibodies thought to contribute to the inflammation in GPA. Once the disease is under control, some people may also need surgical treatment. For example, surgery may be needed to correct any nose deformities, narrowing of the airways or obstruction of the tear ducts that can occur as a result of the tissue damage caused by GPA. If damage to the kidneys means they are no longer able to work properly, a kidney transplant may be needed. Outlook Although GPA can be life-threatening, early diagnosis and modern treatments can significantly improve the outlook. Most people are able to achieve remission with medical treatment, although about half of people with GPA will have a relapse at some point. This usually happens within a few years of stopping treatment. If you do have a relapse, you will usually need to start taking medication again or increase the doses of any medication you are already taking. Most people with GPA are able to lead normal lives, although \u2013 in addition to taking medication regularly \u2013 you will need to have regular check-ups to monitor your progress and check for signs of a relapse. Complications, if they occur, are often the result of a delay in diagnosis and a lack of treatment. If left untreated, people with GPA may develop severe inflammation in the respiratory tract and kidneys, which can eventually lead to life-threatening lung and kidney failure. Information about you If you have GPA, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Chest X-ray of a woman with Wegener's granulomatosis, showing damage to the lungs  Coughing up blood Read about what you should do if you cough up blood and find out what the cause might be Page last reviewed: 09\/09\/2014 Next review due: 09\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 204 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Steroid medication Nosebleeds Coughing up blood Blood in urine Sinusitis External links Vasculitis UK: GPA Nosebleeds Nosebleeds are common and usually harmless. Find out how to treat them at home and when to seek medical advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Weight loss","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Loseweight\/Pages\/Loseweighthome.aspx","content":"Lose weight - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lose weight Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Weight loss support Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Start the NHS weight loss plan Develop healthier eating habits and get more active with the NHS Choices weight loss guide. 'I did 10 diets in 50 days and found one that really worked' Bored with yo-yo dieting, Andy tried 10 diets in 50 days in the hope of finding one he could stick to for life. 'I remember being 10 years old and feeling fat' Christine says the NHS weight loss plan helped her overcome a love-hate relationship with food 'I want to be a good role model for my daughter' Phil says the weight loss plan has left him feeling healthier, fitter and more confident. Nine medical reasons for putting on weight Nine medical reasons that could explain why you're putting on weight. The truth about carbs We sort the wheat from the chaff to bring you the evidence-based truth about carbs. Top diets review for 2016 Find a weight loss plan to suit you with our review of the most popular diets. 10 surprising 100-calorie snacks Keep hunger at bay with these low-calorie twists on some of the nation's favourite snacks. Healthy breakfasts (for people who hate breakfast) Get into the habit of eating breakfast with these delicious calorie-counted breakfasts. What's your BMI? Are you a healthy weight for your height? Use this simple interactive tool to find out. Start losing weight Begin your weight loss journey today with these tips on diet and physical activity to get started on losing weight. Britain: 'the fat man of Europe' The story of Britain's obesity crisis, including latest statistics, causes and health risks. Top sources of added sugar in our diet From cola, chocolate and ketchup to beer, yoghurt and soup, find out where most of the added sugar in our diet lurks. The truth about sweeteners Find out the evidence on the safety of some of the most common sweeteners available in the UK. Should you lose weight fast? A steady rate of weight loss will produce results that really last. Hidden causes of weight gain Could cheap food, email, stress or late nights be causing you to put on weight? Healthy food swaps Stop eating high-calorie foods and swap them for a healthy, balanced alternative. Eight tips for healthy eating Start eating well with these eight tips for a healthy diet. Diet danger zones Temptation is never far away when you're trying to lose weight. Learn how to handle those diet danger zones. How to diet Find out why some diets are bad for you, plus how to lose weight the healthy way. Very low calorie diets A VLCD contains fewer than 1,000 calories a day. Find out if it's right for you. Food labels How to understand food labels and make healthier choices when shopping. Understanding calories Calories mean energy, and the right energy balance is the key to a healthy weight. How can I speed up my metabolism? What can you do to give your metabolism a boost to help you lose weight? Height\/weight chart Use this chart to check if you're the right weight for your height. Keep weight off Keep losing weight only to regain it? Find out how to make your weight loss stick. How your GP can help you lose weight What your GP can do to help if you have a weight problem. 10-minute workouts Choose from six 10-minute home workouts to improve your general fitness and tone your abs, legs, buttocks and triceps. The 10,000 steps challenge Walking 10,000 steps a day can build stamina, burn excess calories and give you a healthier heart. 'I ran a marathon after losing weight' Christine ran her very first marathon after losing weight with the NHS weight loss plan. My 12-week weight loss journey Stephanie Higgins tells how she lost 9.2kg with the NHS weight loss plan without ever going hungry. Weight loss: 'I knew I had to change' Robert Langston was overweight, asthmatic and diabetic. Find out how he turned his life around. 'Is weight loss surgery right for me?' If you've tried lifestyle changes, surgery might be right for you. But it's not an easy option. Vicky's story: 'My gastric band surgery' Vicky talks about the changes she had to make to her diet before and after weight loss surgery, and what it's like living with a gastric band. 'Slimming clubs helped me lose weight' Mother-of-four Cheryl Taylor tells how slimming clubs helped her drop nine dress sizes in two years and turn her life around. Weight loss wonders Brendan and Debbie Byrne lost weight together when they swapped takeaways for healthy home cooking. How to stay motivated When you're trying to lose weight, it can be tough to stay motivated. Real-life slimmers share tips that work. 'I beat middle-age spread' Julie Thompson put on weight during the menopause. When she hit 79kg, she joined a slimming club. 'Weight loss feels great' Nick Green's weight rocketed when he stopped smoking. But with a healthy diet and exercise, he lost more than 40kg and got fit. 'I weighed 70kg at age 11' Chris Bennington, 14, lost more than a stone when he swapped pizza and chips for healthy pasta. Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked Want to lose weight? Sign up for email support Sign up form First name, last name (optional) Your email address Confirm email address By clicking on the button below you are agreeing to our terms and conditions. View our privacy policy. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Probiotics Many health claims are made about probiotics. Find out when they might help and when to be sceptical Overweight children: advice for parents Practical advice for parents of overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and physical activity Is green tea a superfood? From weight loss wonder to cancer cure, we review the evidence surrounding the health claims made about green tea Weight loss myths Do slimming pills work? Is healthy food expensive? The truth behind 10 common myths about weight loss Bodybuilding and sports supplements Supplements are popular for people wanting to lose weight and build muscle, but some are illegal and dangerous Cut down on your calories Many of us are eating too much and not being active enough. Find out how to cut the calories Strength and Flex Download our Strength and flexibility podcast series and get a free personal trainer 5K+ running podcasts for C25K graduates Take your running to the next level with new podcasts for Couch to 5K graduates Health and fitness Boost your health and fitness with fun and practical ideas to get active and improve your general health Food and diet Find out how to achieve a healthy, nutritious diet to help you look and feel your best Superfoods: the evidence We examine the evidence behind the health claims made about the most popular superfoods NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find weight loss support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=WeightLoss","content":"Find Weight loss support groups services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Weight loss support groups services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Weight loss (unexpected and unplanned)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/unexpected-weight-loss","content":"Unintentional weight loss - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Unintentional weight loss  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Unintentional weight loss Introduction  Sudden, noticeable weight loss can happen after a stressful event, although it can also be a sign of a serious illness. It's normal to lose a noticeable amount of weight after the stress of changing jobs, divorce, redundancy or bereavement. Weight often returns to normal when you start to feel happier, after you've had time to grieve or get used to the change. Counselling and support may be needed to help you get to this stage. Significant weight loss can also be the result of an eating disorder, such as anorexia or bulimia. If you think you have an eating disorder, talk to someone you trust and consider speaking to your GP. There are also several organisations you can talk to for information and advice, such as the eating disorders charity Beat. If your weight loss wasn't due to the above causes, and you didn't lose weight through dieting or exercising, see your GP, as you may have an illness that needs treating. The following information may give you a better idea of the cause of your weight loss, but don't use it to diagnose yourself. Always see a GP for a proper diagnosis. How much weight loss is a concern? Your body weight can regularly fluctuate, but the persistent, unintentional loss of more than 5% of your weight over 6 to 12 months is usually a cause for concern. Losing this much weight can be a sign of malnutrition, where a person's diet doesn't contain the right amount of nutrients. You should pay particular attention if you experience other symptoms, such as: tiredness loss of appetite a change in your toilet habits an increase in illnesses or infections Other common causes of unexpected weight loss Unintentional weight loss doesn't always have an identifiable underlying cause but, in addition to the causes mentioned above, it's often the result of: depression  an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism), or over-treating an underactive thyroid cancer Less common causes of unexpected weight loss Less frequently, unexpected weight loss may be the result of: the side effects of certain medications alcohol misuse or drug misuse  heart, kidney, lung or liver disease a problem with the glands that secrete hormones \u2013 such as Addison's disease or undiagnosed diabetes a long-term inflammatory condition, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus dental problems \u2013 such as losing teeth, having new orthodontics or mouth ulcers a condition that causes dysphagia (swallowing problems) a disease of the gut, such as a stomach ulcer, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) or coeliac disease a bacterial, viral or parasitic infection, such as persistent gastroenteritis, tuberculosis (TB) or HIV and AIDS dementia \u2013 people with dementia may be unable to communicate their eating needs Click on the links above for more information about these causes, including advice on how to manage them. Page last reviewed: 21\/03\/2016 Next review due: 21\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 295 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 110  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Healthy eating Overcoming eating disorders Dealing with loss, grief or an emotional crisis Find emotional support services External links Cruse Bereavement Care Beat Struggling with stress? Work, relationships, money problems \u2013 many of life's demands can cause stress. Learn how to control it Eating disorders explained The facts about eating disorders, including what they are, who's affected by them, and what to do NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Weight loss surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/weight-loss-surgery","content":"Weight loss surgery - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Weight loss surgery  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Weight loss surgery weight-loss-surgery Who can have it weight-loss-surgery Getting ready weight-loss-surgery The operation weight-loss-surgery Recovery weight-loss-surgery Lifestyle weight-loss-surgery Results weight-loss-surgery Risks Introduction  Weight loss surgery, also called bariatric surgery, is used to treat people who are dangerously obese. This type of surgery is only available on the NHS to treat people with potentially life-threatening obesity when other treatments, such as lifestyle changes, haven't worked. Potentially life-threatening obesity is defined as: having a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or above having a BMI of 35 or above and having another serious health condition that could be improved if you lose weight, such as type 2 diabetes or high blood pressure Adults who have recently been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes may also be considered for an assessment for weight loss surgery if they have a BMI of 30-34.9.  For people who meet the above criteria, weight loss surgery has proved to be effective in significantly and quickly reducing excess body fat.  However, it's always recommended that you try to lose weight through a healthy, calorie-controlled diet and increased amounts of exercise before you consider weight loss surgery, as surgery carries a risk of complications and requires a significant change in lifestyle afterwards. Because of these associated risks, most surgeons, whether they're working privately or for the NHS, would only consider someone for surgery if there was a clinical need, and not for cosmetic reasons. Read more about who can have weight loss surgery. Availability of weight loss surgery Even if you're eligible for weight loss surgery, the demand on the NHS is currently higher than supply in many areas of the country. Therefore, there may be a considerable waiting list. Weight loss surgery is also available privately. Prices are around:  £5,000-8,000 for gastric banding £9,500-15,000 for gastric bypass surgery An increasing number of people are seeking treatment abroad, as costs for private treatment are often cheaper in other countries, but this should be considered carefully. For more information, see planned treatment abroad. Types of weight loss surgery The three most widely used types of weight loss surgery are: gastric band \u2013 where a band is used to reduce the stomach's size, so a smaller amount of food is required to make you feel full gastric bypass \u2013 where your digestive system is re-routed past most of your stomach, so you digest less food and it takes much less to make you feel full sleeve gastrectomy \u2013 where some of the stomach is removed to reduce the amount of food that's required to make you feel full Several other surgical techniques may be recommended in certain circumstances. Read more about how weight loss surgery is performed. Life after weight loss surgery Weight loss surgery can achieve impressive results in terms of the amount of weight lost, but it shouldn't be seen as a magic cure for obesity. People who have had weight loss surgery need to stick to a rigorous and lifelong plan afterwards to avoid putting weight back on or long-term complications. This plan will include: a carefully controlled diet regular exercise The rapid weight loss may cause relationship problems \u2013 for example, with a partner who is also obese \u2013 and it may lead to unwanted loose folds of skin, which may need further surgery to correct. Many people with mental health problems, such as depression or anxiety, find that these problems do not automatically improve because they have lost weight. It's important to have realistic expectations about what life after weight loss surgery will be like. Read more about life after weight loss surgery. Risks As with all types of surgery, weight loss surgery carries the risk of complications, some of which are serious and potentially fatal, such as: internal bleeding a blood clot inside the leg (deep vein thrombosis) a blood clot or other blockage inside the lungs (pulmonary embolism) The overall risk of death in hospital after having any kind of weight loss surgery is around 1 in 1,000. Certain risk factors, such as high blood pressure or a BMI of 50 or above, also increase the risk of complications. Read more about the risks of weight loss surgery. Results As long as a person is willing and able to stick to their agreed plan afterwards, surgery can effectively reduce their weight and treat conditions associated with obesity, such as diabetes. Recent research carried out in America found that, on average: people with a gastric band will lose around half their excess body weight people with a gastric bypass will lose around two-thirds of their excess body weight Both techniques also lead to a considerable improvement (and sometimes a complete cure) of obesity-related conditions, such as diabetes or high blood pressure. Read more about the results of weight loss surgery. BMI and obesity The most widely used method of seeing if you're a healthy weight is to calculate your BMI. This is your weight in kilograms divided by your height in metres squared: If your BMI is 25-29.9, you're over the ideal weight for your height (overweight). If your BMI is 30-39.9, you're obese. If your BMI is over 40, you're very obese (known as morbidly obese). BMI doesn't provide an accurate assessment of weight in all circumstances, such as in people who are very muscular or children going through a sudden growth spurt. Page last reviewed: 26\/03\/2015 Next review due: 26\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 198 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 109  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Understanding BMI results in adults Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out how to calculate your body mass index (BMI) and interpret the results correctly. Media last reviewed: 20\/01\/2016 Next review due: 20\/01\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Obesity Healthy eating Emotional health Health and fitness Lose weight Understanding calories BMI healthy weight calculator External links NICE: obesity 'My gastric band surgery' Vicky talks about the changes she had to make to her diet before and after weight loss surgery, and what it's like living with a gastric band Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan 'Is weight loss surgery right for me?' Find out whether weight loss surgery, including gastric band and gastric bypass, is right for you, and how it would affect your diet and lifestyle NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Weil's disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/leptospirosis","content":"Leptospirosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Leptospirosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leptospirosis Clinical trials Leptospirosis Leptospirosis Symptoms Leptospirosis Causes Leptospirosis Treatment Leptospirosis Prevention Introduction  Leptospirosis is a type of bacterial infection spread by animals. It's caused by a strain of bacteria called leptospira. In 90% of cases, leptospirosis only causes mild flu-like symptoms, such as a headache, chills and muscle pain. However, in some cases the infection is more severe and can cause life-threatening problems, including organ failure and internal bleeding. In its most severe form, leptospirosis is also known as Weil's disease. The common mild symptoms mean most leptospirosis infections are hard to diagnose. Diagnosis is easier if the infection causes more serious problems. Read more about the symptoms of leptospirosis. Why does leptospirosis happen? Leptospirosis is spread to humans by animals. You can catch it by touching soil or water contaminated with the urine of wild animals infected with the leptospira bacteria. Animals known to be carriers of the leptospira bacteria include cattle, pigs, dogs and rodents, particularly rats. Although the condition is uncommon in the UK, people who regularly deal with animals, such as farmers and vets, have a higher risk of developing leptospirosis. You may also be at a higher risk if you frequently come into contact with rivers and lakes. This might be because of your occupation or through taking part in activities such as water sports and fishing. It's incredibly rare for it to spread between humans. Read more about the causes of leptospirosis. When to see your GP See your GP if you are experiencing symptoms of leptospirosis and you have recently: travelled to parts of the world where leptospirosis is widespread been exposed to a freshwater source, such as a river, lake, drain, canal, pond or flood water been exposed to animal urine or animal blood \u2013 for example, if you work in farming, an abattoir, or care for animals (veterinary care) A diagnosis of leptospirosis can be confirmed by running a series of blood and urine tests to check for specific antibodies. Who is affected? Leptospirosis is rare in the UK, with less than 40 cases reported in England and Wales every year. Many cases originate overseas and the condition is rarely fatal. Most of the people affected either worked with livestock, or contracted the condition from sewage or freshwater sources. Leptospirosis is more common in tropical and subtropical areas of the world. Can leptospirosis be prevented? The risk of contracting leptospirosis in the UK is so low you don't need to take drastic measures to avoid the condition. If you work with animals \u2013 dead or alive \u2013 or are in regular contact with freshwater sources, you can help protect yourself from leptospirosis by wearing appropriate protective clothing and by cleaning and dressing wounds. This advice is particularly useful if you 're travelling to an area where leptospirosis is more common. Read more about preventing leptospirosis. How is leptospirosis treated? Leptospirosis is treated with a course of antibiotics. For mild forms of leptospirosis, antibiotic tablets that can be taken at home are usually used for about a week. Most people with more severe leptospirosis will be admitted to hospital so their body's functions can be supported while the underlying infection is treated with injections of antibiotics. Read more about treating leptospirosis. Reporting leptospirosis If you may have contracted leptospirosis at your place of work, notify your employer so they can report it. If you're self-employed, you should report it yourself. You can read more about Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations on the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) website. Page last reviewed: 12\/11\/2014 Next review due: 12\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 158  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food and water abroad Travel health External links HSE: leptospirosis \u2013 are you at risk? (PDF, 94kb) NaTHNaC: leptospirosis Safe swimming: what's lurking in the water? Make sure you don\u2019t catch anything nasty when taking the plunge in the sea, river, pond or lake Find and choose services for Leptospirosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Welts","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Nettle-rash","content":"Urticaria (hives) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urticaria (hives)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Nettle-rash Clinical trials Urticaria (hives) Nettle-rash Causes Nettle-rash Diagnosis Nettle-rash Treatment Introduction  Urticaria \u2013 also known as hives, weals, welts or nettle rash \u2013 is a raised, itchy rash that appears on the skin. It may appear on one part of the body or be spread across large areas.  The rash is usually very itchy and ranges in size from a few millimetres to the size of a hand. Although the affected area may change in appearance within 24 hours, the rash usually settles within a few days. Doctors may refer to urticaria as either: acute urticaria \u2013 if the rash clears completely within six weeks chronic urticaria \u2013 in rarer cases, where the rash persists or comes and goes for more than six weeks, often over many years A much rarer type of urticaria, known as urticaria vasculitis, can cause blood vessels inside the skin to become inflamed. In these cases, the weals last longer than 24 hours, are more painful, and can leave a bruise. When to seek medical advice Visit your GP if your symptoms don't go away within 48 hours. You should also contact your GP if your symptoms are: severe causing distress disrupting daily activities occurring alongside other symptoms Who's affected by urticaria? Acute urticaria (also known as short-term urticaria) is a common condition, estimated to affect around one in five people at some point in their lives. Children are often affected by the condition, as well as women aged 30 to 60, and people with a history of allergies. Chronic urticaria (also known as long-term urticaria) is much less common, affecting up to five in every 1,000 people in England. What causes urticaria? Urticaria occurs when a trigger causes high levels of histamine and other chemical messengers to be released in the skin. These substances cause the blood vessels in the affected area of skin to open up (often resulting in redness or pinkness) and become leaky. This extra fluid in the tissues causes swelling and itchiness. Histamine is released for many reasons, including: an allergic reaction \u2013 such as a food allergy or a reaction to an insect bite or sting cold or heat exposure  infection \u2013 such as a cold certain medications \u2013 such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or antibiotics However, in many cases of urticaria, no obvious cause can be found. Some cases of long-term urticaria may be caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking healthy tissue. However, this is difficult to diagnose and the treatment options are the same. Certain triggers may also make the symptoms worse. These include: drinking alcohol or caffeine emotional stress warm temperature Read more about the causes of urticaria. Diagnosing urticaria Your GP will usually be able to diagnose urticaria by examining the rash. They may also ask you questions to find out what triggered your symptoms. If your GP thinks that it's caused by an allergic reaction, you may be referred to an allergy clinic for an allergy test. However, if you've had urticaria most days for more than six weeks, it's unlikely to be the result of an allergy. You may also be referred for a number of tests, including a full blood count (FBC), to find out whether there's an underlying cause of your symptoms. Read more about diagnosing urticaria. Treating urticaria In many cases, treatment isn't needed for urticaria, because the rash often gets better within a few days. If the itchiness is causing you discomfort, antihistamines can help. Antihistamines are available over the counter at pharmacies \u2013 speak to your pharmacist for advice. A short course of steroid tablets (oral corticosteroids) may occasionally be needed for more severe cases of urticaria. If you have persistent urticaria, you may be referred to a skin specialist (dermatologist). Treatment usually involves medication to relieve the symptoms, while identifying and avoiding potential triggers. Read about treating urticaria. Complications of urticaria Around a quarter of people with acute urticaria and half of people with chronic urticaria also develop angioedema, which is a deeper swelling of tissues. Chronic urticaria can also be upsetting and negatively impact a person's mood and quality of life. Angioedema Angioedema is swelling in the deeper layers of a person's skin. It's often severe and is caused by a build-up of fluid. The symptoms of angioedema can affect any part of the body, but usually affect the: eyes lips genitals hands feet Medication such as antihistamines and short courses of oral corticosteroids (tablets) can be used to relieve the swelling. Read more about treating angioedema. Emotional impact Living with any long-term condition can be difficult. Chronic urticaria can have a considerable negative impact on a person's mood and quality of life. Living with itchy skin can be particularly upsetting. One study found that chronic urticaria can have the same negative impact as heart disease. It also found that one in seven people with chronic urticaria had some sort of psychological or emotional problem, such as:  stress anxiety depression See your GP if your urticaria is getting you down. Effective treatments are available to improve your symptoms. Talking to friends and family can also improve feelings of isolation and help you cope better with your condition. Read about how talking to others can help. Anaphylaxis Urticaria can be one of the first symptoms of a severe allergic reaction known as anaphylaxis. Other symptoms of anaphylaxis include: swollen eyes, lips, hands and feet feeling lightheaded or faint narrowing of the airways, which can cause wheezing and breathing difficulties abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting  collapsing and becoming unconsciousness Anaphylaxis should always be treated as a medical emergency. Call 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance if you or someone else is experiencing anaphylaxis. Tell the operator about your (or their) symptoms. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/02\/2016 Next review due: 28\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 719 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 378  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 201  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaphylaxis Angioedema Antihistamines Corticosteroids Itching Long-term condition assessment External links Allergy UK: urticaria and angioedema British Association of Dermatologists: urticaria and angioedema Common skin conditions Facts about some of the most common skin problems, including causes and available treatments Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes Allergies Advice on allergies such as eczema and food allergy, and what treatments are available on the NHS NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"West Nile virus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/west-nile-virus","content":"West Nile virus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories West Nile virus   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview West-Nile-Virus Clinical trials West Nile virus Introduction  West Nile virus (WNV) is a virus that's found in many countries around the world and spread by mosquitoes. Most cases of WNV are not serious and many people have no symptoms or only mild flu-like symptoms, such as headaches, muscle aches and a high temperature (fever). Serious problems occur in fewer than 1 in 100 people infected with the virus, but can include infection of the brain (encephalitis), spinal cord, and tissues surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis), which can be fatal. Signs of a severe infection can include muscle weakness, disorientation, seizures (fits) and loss of consciousness. You should seek medical advice as soon as possible if you develop symptoms of WNV while you are travelling or after you return home. Make sure you tell the health practitioner where you have been travelling. Where is WNV found? Despite its name, WNV is found in many parts of the world, including: Africa west and central Asia The Middle East Europe, particularly southern Europe North, Central and South America The Caribbean Australia In tropical countries, it's possible to catch WNV all year round. In places with changing summer and winter seasons, such as North America, WNV is usually more common during summer and autumn. For more information about the area you are visiting, check the NaTHNaC website. There have been no confirmed cases of WNV originating in the UK, and cases affecting travellers returning to the UK are very rare. WNV is spread through the bites of infected mosquitoes. Mosquitoes become infected when they feed on infected birds. They can then spread the virus to humans and other animals they bite. The virus cannot be spread from close person-to-person contact \u2013 for example, by kissing someone who is infected. Diagnosis and treatment WNV can usually be diagnosed with a blood test. If meningitis is suspected, a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (the fluid surrounding your brain and spinal cord) will be removed during a lumbar puncture and tested. There is no specific treatment for the infection. If your symptoms are mild, they will usually get better without treatment in a few days and you won't normally experience any long-term side effects. If your symptoms are more severe, you will need to go to hospital. Treatment may include intravenous fluids (given through a drip in your arm), medication to control seizures, and help with breathing. Even with treatment, severe WNV can lead to long-term problems such as fatigue (extreme tiredness), muscle weakness and memory problems. Preventing WNV As there is no specific treatment or vaccine for WNV, it's best to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes when visiting affected areas. The mosquitoes that carry WNV are most active around dusk and dawn. You should follow the advice below while you are away: Wear loose-fitting, long-sleeved tops and long trousers that cover up your skin as much as possible. Use an insect repellent on exposed skin, taking care to avoid your eyes. Repellents containing 50% diethyltoluamide (DEET) are thought to be the most effective. Insect-proof screens on windows and doors and mosquito nets impregnated with insecticide over the bed will reduce mosquito bites inside. Air conditioning in the room may also help. Avoid areas where there are likely to be large numbers of mosquitoes, such as near stagnant pools of water. Read more about preventing insect bites. West Nile virus develops into a serious condition in less than 1 in 100 people who are infected  Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Page last reviewed: 19\/11\/2014 Next review due: 19\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 43 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Encephalitis Insect bites and stings Meningitis Travel health External links Fit for travel: avoiding insect bites NaTHNaC: West Nile virus The Encephalitis Society Before you travel Advice for people travelling abroad, covering jet lag, vaccinations, DVT, travel insurance and sun safety NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Wheat intolerance","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/digestive-health\/Pages\/cutting-out-bread.aspx","content":"Should you cut out bread to stop bloating? - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Should you cut out bread to stop bloating? Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Digestive health Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Is eating bread giving you bloating and other digestive symptoms? If so, you could be \"sensitive\" to wheat. Cutting out bread or changing the type you eat may help. What's with wheat? There are three key health problems caused by wheat. Wheat allergy: reactions usually begin within minutes and include itching, rash, tongue or lip swelling and wheezing. See your GP for referral to an NHS allergy clinic. Coeliac disease: also known as gluten intolerance, is a common digestive condition where your intestine can't absorb gluten found in wheat, barley, oats and rye. See your GP for a blood test. Wheat sensitivity: symptoms like bloating, cramps, diarrhoea and sickness come on quite slowly, usually hours after eating wheat. There is no diagnostic test. More and more of us claim to suffer from a wheat allergy, so we shun bread and other wheat-based foods like pasta and cereals. Genuine food allergy is, in fact, rarely to blame, say experts. But wheat sensitivity (also known as wheat intolerance) or simply trouble digesting wheat is increasingly common. Bread-related gut symptoms \"Probably one-third of patients in my allergy clinic complain of digestive symptoms such as bloating, diarrhoea, vomiting and stomach pain after eating bread,\" says Isabel Skypala PhD, specialist allergy dietitian at the Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust. She says allergy is unlikely to be the culprit, but bread-related symptoms are real and wheat could be to blame. \"Some people find certain foods are simply hard to digest and wheat appears to be one of those,\" she explains. Find out how to tell if you have a food allergy or intolerance. The health problems caused by wheat There are three key health problems caused by wheat: Wheat allergy \u2013 reactions usually begin within minutes and include itching, sneezing and wheezing. See your GP for referral to an NHS allergy clinic. Coeliac disease \u2013 is a condition where the intestine lining can't absorb and is damaged by gluten-containing foods including wheat, barley, oats and rye. See your GP for a blood test. Wheat sensitivity \u2013 symptoms like bloating, cramps, diarrhoea and sickness come on quite slowly, usually hours after eating wheat. There\u2019s no diagnostic test. What to do if wheat triggers digestive symptoms If your symptoms are severe and long-lasting, especially if you have blood in your stools (poo), vomiting or painful stomach cramps, see your doctor to rule out a medical condition. If you have bloating or other minor symptoms after eating bread, Dr Skypala recommends that you try an elimination diet. This is where you completely cut out wheat from your diet for four weeks, then bring it back in gradually to see if symptoms reappear. \"When you bring wheat-based foods back in, I recommend trying Weetabix or pasta first for a few days before starting on bread. It\u2019s better to start with wheat in a more pure form, as bread has so many other ingredients,\" Dr Skypala says. Is it wheat intolerance or sensitivity? If your symptoms return, it confirms you\u2019re sensitive to wheat and will also show you which foods are especially troublesome. Some people may only have problems with pasta, for example, while others are fine until they eat bread. If you are sensitive to wheat, or you have trouble digesting it, the main way to relieve your symptoms is to embark on a wheat-free or partially wheat-free diet. Foods that contain wheat Bread Pasta Cereals Couscous Cakes and pastries Biscuits Doughnuts Hydrolysed vegetable protein (HVP) Beer Soy sauce Wheat-free foods These foods are a great alternative to wheat-based ones: Porridge, Rice Krispies and corn flakes Buckwheat pasta Quinoa The main sources of wheat Bread Pasta Cereals Couscous Cakes and pastries Biscuits Doughnuts Hydrolysed vegetable protein (HVP) Beer Soy sauce These wheat-free foods are a great alternative: Porridge, rice crispies and cornflakes Buckwheat pasta Quinoa Popcorn How to go on a wheat-free diet Cutting out bread and other foods containing wheat shouldn\u2019t harm your health, if you do it properly. Wheat is one of our staple foods and lots of wheat products, such as breakfast cereals, are fortified with vitamins and minerals. In the past, there was a danger of running short of essential nutrients like B vitamins and iron if you cut out wheat. But nowadays there\u2019s a good range of widely available wheat-free alternatives that won\u2019t compromise a balanced diet. Read more about vitamins and minerals. \"There are great wheat substitutes that you can buy off the supermarket shelf now. Go for gluten-free bread and try other types of grains, such as quinoa, corn and rice,\" says Dr Skypala. \"Just make sure you substitute other equally nutritious foods for the wheat-based ones you\u2019re cutting out.\" Be sure to cut out all wheat from your diet. Some sources of wheat are obvious, such as bread, but others are less so, such as soy sauce. Tummy-friendly breads The good news is that you might not need to cut out bread completely. Some people with wheat sensitivity have no problems when they eat toast (cooked wheat tends to be easier to digest), sourdough bread, bread cooked with flour made from French wheat, or any bread from a specialist bakery, rather than a supermarket. \"Bakeries in supermarkets use the Chorleywood bread-making process, which cuts out the second rising, to speed up the baking. People seem to have more problems digesting supermarket breads, so I\u2019d always recommend avoiding store-bought loaves,\" says Dr Skypala. The anti-bloat FODMAP diet A specific type of wheat-free diet may help certain people with wheat sensitivity. Designed originally for people with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), the low-FODMAP diet is now being recommended by dietitians to people who have problems digesting wheat. It\u2019s not a catchy name, but FODMAP stands for fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols, which are types of carbohydrates that aren\u2019t easily broken down and absorbed by the gut. Essentially, the diet entails cutting out fermentable (FODMAP) foods that can cause bacterial growth, leading to diarrhoea and bloating. That means cutting out wheat and other fermentable foods such as onion, apple, pears, mushrooms, honey, cabbage and sometimes milk. \"The FODMAP diet has been hugely successful for people with IBS. Because it excludes wheat, many people with wheat sensitivity may also find it helpful,\" says Dr Skypala. The low-FODMAP diet works best if it's coupled with special dietary advice from a dietitian. There are low-FODMAP-trained dietitians working in the NHS and privately. If you want to see an NHS dietitian, ask your GP or consultant to refer you.  Read more about the low-FODMAP diet. Here's a list of foods suitable on a low-FODMAP diet (PDF, 369kb). Read about the best foods to help your digestion.   Page last reviewed: 18\/05\/2015 Next review due: 18\/05\/2017 More articles on: Digestive health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 258 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 165  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food allergy Coeliac disease External links Allergy UK: wheat and gluten intolerance Anaphylaxis campaign: wheat allergy leaflet British Dietetic Association: food allergy and intolerances Coeliac UK: coeliac disease facts Community content from HealthUnlocked Food allergy and intolerance myth buster There is much in the media about food allergies and intolerances, but what is the difference? And can you tell fact from fiction? Starchy foods Starchy foods are our main source of carbohydrate and play an important role in a healthy diet, but most of us don't eat enough of them Is it a food allergy or intolerance? Around 2% of people in the UK have a food allergy, but many more have a food intolerance Beat the bloat Tips for getting rid of bloating, including cutting out 'windy' foods and fizzy drinks, plus regular exercise Digestive health Find out how to beat common digestive problems like bloating and indigestion NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Whiplash","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Whiplash","content":"Whiplash - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Whiplash  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Whiplash Clinical trials Whiplash Whiplash Symptoms Whiplash Treatment Whiplash Complications Introduction  Whiplash is a term that describes a neck injury caused by a sudden movement of the head forwards, backwards or sideways. It often occurs after a sudden impact such as a road traffic accident (see below). The vigorous movement of the head overstretches and damages the tendons and ligaments in the neck. Tendons are tough, fibrous bands that connect muscles to bone. Ligaments are fibrous connective tissues that link two bones together at a joint. Common symptoms of whiplash include: neck pain and stiffness tenderness over the neck muscles reduced and painful neck movements headaches  After an accident, it can take a while (six to 12 hours) for the symptoms of whiplash to develop. The neck pain and stiffness is often worse on the day after the injury and may get worse for several days afterwards. Causes of whiplash Road traffic accidents are the main cause of whiplash. Car and motorcycle accidents often result in whiplash because the sudden stopping force of the collision makes your head move violently. As whiplash can occur when the head is thrown forwards, backwards or sideways, it can develop after collisions from the front, back or side. Low speed collisions can also cause whiplash. As well as road traffic accidents, whiplash can also be caused by a sudden blow to the head \u2013 for example, during contact sports, such as boxing or rugby. A slip or fall where the head is suddenly and violently jolted backwards can also cause whiplash, as can being struck on the head by a heavy or solid object. Diagnosing whiplash Whiplash can usually be diagnosed from a description of your symptoms. Tests and scans aren't usually required. Visit your GP if you've recently been involved in a road accident, or you've had a sudden impact to your head and you have pain and stiffness in your neck. They'll ask about how the injury happened and details of your symptoms. They may also examine your neck for signs of muscle spasms and tenderness and assess the range of movement in your neck. Scans, such as X-rays, computerised tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will usually only be carried out if a fracture or other problem is suspected. Treating whiplash Whiplash will usually get better on its own or after some basic treatment. If you have whiplash, it's better to move your neck rather than keep it still using a neck brace or collar. Your neck may be painful but keeping it mobile from an early stage will improve its functionality and speed up your recovery. Painkillers, such as paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, can be used to help relieve the pain.  Whiplash that lasts for six months or more is sometimes known as chronic whiplash or late whiplash syndrome. Your treatment plan should be based on your symptoms. For example, if you have severe pain, your GP can prescribe a stronger painkiller, such as codeine, or they may recommend physiotherapy. Read more about how whiplash is treated. Complications In most cases, whiplash eventually gets better without causing any lasting damage. However, in a small number of cases, the pain can last for six months or longer (chronic whiplash). Prolonged neck pain may make it difficult for you to carry out daily activities and enjoy your leisure time. It may also cause problems at work and could lead to anxiety and depression. See your GP if you have chronic neck pain that's causing problems with work and preventing you from carrying out normal, everyday activities. Read more about the complications of whiplash. Whiplash is a neck injury due to a sudden, violent movement of the head  Government reports about whiplash Over recent years, an increase in whiplash personal injury claims has been responsible for rising motor insurance premiums. Between 2000-2012, motor injury claims more than doubled, with whiplash accounting for an average of 72% of claims between 2008-2012. In response to the problem, towards the end of 2012, the Ministry of Justice undertook a consultation, involving independent medical panels, to help find better ways of diagnosing possible whiplash injuries. The Transport Committee also recently carried out its own enquiry into the cost of motor insurance and ways of reducing the number of whiplash claims. Read more about the government's investigation into reducing the number and cost of whiplash claims, and the Transport Committee's report about whiplash and the cost of motor insurance. Page last reviewed: 03\/09\/2014 Next review due: 03\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 242 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Neck pain Physiotherapy Sprains and strains Road safety External links GOV.UK: driving with a disability or health condition RoSPA: head restraints and whiplash RoSPA: road safety advice for drivers The Pain Toolkit Neck pain or a stiff neck Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. Find out about the main causes and how to relieve it Road safety Learn how to stay safe on busy roads, whether you're driving, cycling, or on foot NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"White blood cell deficiencies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/agranulocytosis","content":"Agranulocytosis and neutropenia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Agranulocytosis and neutropenia (white blood cell deficiencies)   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Agranulocytosis and neutropenia Introduction  Granulocytes are a type of white blood cell that help fight infection. 'Agranulocytosis' and 'neutropenia' are terms often used to describe a deficiency of these cells. However, the two terms shouldn't be used interchangeably, as they describe slightly different conditions. agranulocytosis is the term used when the bone marrow (soft tissue inside bone) fails to make enough granulocytes neutropenia is the term used when the bone marrow fails to make enough of a specific group of granulocytes called neutrophils Although these conditions are slightly different, they tend to share many similar causes and symptoms, and are often treated in a similar way. What causes agranulocytosis and neutropenia? Agranulocytosis and neutropenia usually occur later in life, as the result of another condition or treatment (acquired), but can sometimes be present from birth (congenital). Depending on the cause, your white blood cell count may recover over time. However, in some cases, the problem can be persistent. Acquired agranulocytosis and neutropenia Common causes of acquired agranulocytosis or neutropenia include: chemotherapy or a bone marrow transplant (or preparation for a bone marrow transplant) certain medications \u2013 including some anti-psychotics and some medications for an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) an autoimmune disorder (where the body's immune system mistakenly attacks its own tissues) \u2013 such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis a bone marrow disease \u2013 such as myelodysplasia (where blood cells do not develop properly) or leukaemia certain infections \u2013 including HIV and hepatitis Congenital agranulocytosis and neutropenia Congenital agranulocytosis or neutropenia can be caused by several rare genetic faults (altered genes) that may be passed on to a child by one or both of his or her parents. Individuals of Afro-Caribbean descent often have a naturally slightly lower neutrophil count than those of other ethnic origins, but this is entirely normal and does not lead to any health problems. Signs and symptoms Most people with agranulocytosis or neutropenia will not have any obvious symptoms. However, these conditions may mean you are more vulnerable to picking up infections because you don't have enough white blood cells to fight germs effectively. Symptoms associated with an infection can include: a high temperature (fever) chills and shivering headaches sweating facial flushing a sore throat or mouth mouth ulcers swollen glands a lack of energy flu-like symptoms In some people, infections can spread quickly through the body and can lead to a life-threatening condition called sepsis. In addition to some of the above symptoms, sepsis can also cause a fast heartbeat and fast breathing. Seeking medical advice Most people at risk of agranulocytosis or neutropenia should already be aware of signs to look out for, and will have been told what to do if they experience them. For example, if you have been having chemotherapy, your cancer care team may have given you a telephone number you can call if you experience any problems, such as a high temperature. If you know you are at risk of these white blood cell deficiencies and you start to feel unwell, it's important to contact your doctor or care team immediately. Sepsis is a medical emergency and should be assessed by a doctor in hospital as soon as possible so appropriate treatment can be started quickly. Diagnosing and managing agranulocytosis and neutropenia If your doctor suspects you have agranulocytosis or neutropenia, they will carry out a blood test to check the level of white blood cells in your blood. If one of these conditions is diagnosed, the treatment and advice offered to you will depend on the cause and severity of your condition. Reducing your infection risk You will often be given some advice about ways you can reduce your risk of infection while your white blood cell count is low. This may include: avoiding undercooked and some raw foods that could lead to food poisoning avoiding close contact with people you know have an infection making sure you store and prepare food properly maintaining good personal hygiene, such as washing your hands with soap and warm water regularly Read more about food safety and preventing germs from spreading. Antibiotics If you develop an infection, you will usually need to be treated with antibiotics because your body will not be able to fight the infection itself. Depending on the severity of the infection, you may be given antibiotic tablets to take at home, or you may need to have antibiotics given directly into a vein (intravenously) while in hospital. In some cases, you may be given a course of low-dose antibiotics to take to stop infections developing in the first place. G-CSF injections Some people may need injections of a medication called G-CSF (granulocyte-colony stimulating factor), which can stimulate the bone marrow to produce more white blood cells. Granulocyte infusions In very rare cases, you may need to go to hospital to have a type of blood transfusion where you are just given granulocyte cells. Granulocytes for transfusion are ideally taken from a donor who is a friend or relative. The donor is given corticosteroid medication plus G-CSF, which helps them to produce more granulocytes and increases the number of these in their blood. The donor's blood is then removed and the white cells are separated out for transfusion. The transfusion is usually given through a tiny plastic tube called a cannula, which is inserted into a vein in your arm. Bone marrow transplant In particularly severe cases, you may need a bone marrow transplant (stem cell transplant) to replace your damaged bone marrow with healthy bone marrow stem cells taken from a donor. White blood cells play a key role in fighting infection  Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a treatment for cancer where medication is used to kill cancerous cells. Find out more about its effects Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/09\/2014 Next review due: 24\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 107 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Blood tests Blood transfusion Bone marrow (stem cell) transplant Chemotherapy External links Lab Tests Online: white blood cell count Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections Donating blood Doctors rely on blood donations to carry out life-saving treatments every day. Find out how you can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"White coated tongue","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/coated-tongue","content":"Coated or white tongue - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coated or white tongue  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coated or white tongue Introduction  A coated or white tongue occurs when the surface is colonised by bacteria or fungi, and dead cells become trapped between the small nodules on the tongue. A coated tongue isn't a disease and isn't usually a sign of anything serious. It's usually only temporary. You can try gently brushing it with a tongue scraper and drinking plenty of water to help it improve. However, sometimes a coated tongue can indicate an infection or more serious condition. You should see your GP for advice if: you're concerned about changes to the appearance of your tongue your tongue hurts (read about the causes of tongue pain) your coated tongue persists for longer than two weeks You can read on to learn more about the possible causes of a coated tongue, but don't use this to diagnose yourself with a condition \u2013 always leave that to your GP. Note that in a minority of people, a coated tongue may never return to its normal colour or texture, even after treatment.  Common causes of white plaques on the tongue Leukoplakia Leukoplakia is a common condition that results in a white patch in the mouth, which sometimes appears on the tongue. The patch is usually painless but cannot be removed by brushing or scraping. This white patch seems to be the result of too many cells being produced from the lining of the mouth and a protein called keratin being deposited. Leukoplakia can develop when the tongue has been irritated, and is linked with drinking too much alcohol and also with smoking. Although not usually dangerous, in a few cases leukoplakia turns cancerous, often many years or even decades after it first appears.  It's important that your mouth is regularly examined by a dentist or doctor to ensure any leukoplakia isn't increasing in size or changing, or that new areas of leukoplakia are not developing.  Read more information about leukoplakia. Your dentist or specialist will usually be able to tell the difference between a white tongue caused by leukoplakia and a coated tongue. Oral lichen planus Oral lichen planus (lichen planus of the mouth) is a long-term disorder of the immune system that causes white lacy streaks and white patches in the mouth, including on the tongue.  Mild cases do not usually cause any pain or discomfort, although it can cause burning sensations and discomfort in the mouth, painful red gums and sore patches in the lining of the mouth. The exact cause of oral lichen planus is unknown. It doesn't run in families and can't be passed on to other people.  Mild cases will not need any treatment. More severe cases can be managed with an antiseptic mouthwash plus steroid sprays or steroid tablets dissolved in water to make a mouth rinse. Read more information about lichen planus. Oral thrush Oral thrush is a yeast infection in the mouth caused by a fungus. It can cause a burning sensation on the tongue as well as sore white plaques that can be scraped off (although it may sometimes appear as a red patch). You are more likely to develop oral thrush if you: have diabetes are a certain age (oral thrush is more common in infants and elderly people) often take antibiotics have an iron deficiency or B-vitamin deficiency  have a weakened immune system wear dentures  You should see your GP if you think you have oral thrush. If it's left untreated, the symptoms will persist and your mouth will continue to be uncomfortable. Treatment is with antifungal medicines. Read more information about oral thrush. Syphilis Syphilis is a bacterial infection usually caught by having sex with someone who is infected. Syphilis can cause a small painless sore or ulcer on the tongue if caught from having oral sex. This appears from 10 days to three months after exposure to the infection. Treatment is with a single dose of penicillin. If left untreated, syphilis may lead to white plaques on the tongue called syphilitic leukoplakia. Read more information about syphilis. Oral thrush affecting the tongue  Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening Page last reviewed: 05\/11\/2014 Next review due: 05\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 454 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 199  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Tongue pain Oral thrush Leukoplakia External links British Dental Health Foundation: approved products Dental check-ups How often you need a dental check-up, and what to expect when you visit your dentist NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Whitlow finger","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/herpetic-whitlow","content":"Herpetic whitlow (whitlow finger) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Herpetic whitlow (whitlow finger)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Herpetic whitlow (whitlow finger) Introduction  A herpetic whitlow, or whitlow finger, is an abscess of the end of the finger caused by infection with the herpes simplex virus (the \"cold sore virus\"). It usually affects the fleshy area of the fingertip. What are the symptoms? The fingertip suddenly becomes red, swollen and extremely painful. Small white blisters develop underneath the skin of the finger, which may break to release fluid, eventually crusting over. What's the cause? There are two types of herpes simplex virus (HSV), type 1 and type 2. Both HSV-1 and HSV-2 can cause a herpetic whitlow. These viruses can also cause cold sores and genital herpes. A herpetic whitlow can develop as a secondary infection if you already have a cold sore or genital herpes and you touch the sore area of skin, transferring the virus from your mouth or genitals to your finger. It can also develop if you touch the sore or blister of another infected person.  You're at greater risk of becoming infected if you have a weakened immune system. How is it treated? Antivirals A herpetic whitlow may be treated with an antiviral drug such as aciclovir. You may be prescribed a five or seven day course of 200mg aciclovir to take five times a day or 400mg to take three times a day. But this is only worth taking if you start the treatment within 48 hours of symptoms starting. Using an antiviral after this initial period is unlikely to have any effect. Antiviral drugs may help to heal a herpetic whitlow, but they do not get rid of the herpes simplex virus or prevent future outbreaks of herpes simplex viral infection. A whitlow will heal without an antiviral drug within two to three weeks. Antiviral treatment may: reduce the time taken for the abscess to heal reduce your risk of a secondary bacterial infection reduce your risk of the herpes simplex virus spreading to other parts of the body Caring for the whitlow at home You should cover the whitlow with a light dressing so the infection doesn't spread any further. Avoid wearing contact lenses until the infection has healed, to stop the virus spreading to your eyes. You can take an over-the-counter painkiller such as paracetamol or ibuprofen for pain relief. Do not attempt to drain the fluid, as this may cause the virus to spread or cause a bacterial infection. Will it come back? The herpes virus remains dormant (inactive) in nerve cells and may reactivate at a later date, sometimes following stress or an illness. This can result in another whitlow at the same site as the first one If a whitlow does return, it can be treated in the same way, with an antiviral drug. If the whitlow returns often, the antiviral drug can be given for long periods of time (years) to reduce the number of times it comes back. This suppressive antiviral treatment will also reduce both the severity of the whitlow and the length of time it takes to heal. Page last reviewed: 21\/11\/2014 Next review due: 21\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 189 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cold sores Genital herpes Herpes simplex eye infections External links Herpes Viruses Association Infections in pregnancy How to protect against infections that might affect your baby, such as CMV, toxoplasmosis and rubella NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Whooping cough","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Whooping-cough","content":"Whooping cough - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Whooping cough  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Whooping-cough Clinical trials Whooping cough   Whooping cough, also called pertussis, is a highly contagious bacterial infection of the lungs and airways. It causes repeated coughing bouts that can last for two to three months or more, and can make babies and young children in particular very ill. Whooping cough is spread in the droplets of the coughs or sneezes of someone with the infection. This page covers: Symptoms Who's at risk When to get medical advice Treatment Stopping the infection spreading Vaccinations Complications Symptoms of whooping cough The first symptoms of whooping cough are similar to those of a cold, such as a runny nose, red and watery eyes, a sore throat, and a slightly raised temperature. Intense coughing bouts start about a week later. The bouts usually last a few minutes at a time and tend to be more common at night. Coughing usually brings up thick mucus and may be followed by vomiting. Between coughs, you or your child may gasp for breath \u2013 this may cause a \"whoop\" sound, although not everyone has this. The strain of coughing can cause the face to become very red, and there may be some slight bleeding under the skin or in the eyes. Young children can sometimes briefly turn blue (cyanosis) if they have trouble breathing \u2013 this often looks worse than it is and their breathing should start again quickly. In very young babies, the cough may not be particularly noticeable, but there may be brief periods where they stop breathing. The bouts will eventually start to become less severe and less frequent over time, but it may be a few months before they stop completely. Who's at risk of whooping cough Whooping cough can affect people of any age, including: babies and young children \u2013 young babies under six months of age are at a particularly increased risk of complications of whooping cough older children and adults \u2013 it tends to be less serious in these cases, but can still be unpleasant and frustrating people who've had whooping cough before \u2013 you're not immune to whooping cough if you've had it before, although it tends to be less severe the second time around people vaccinated against whooping cough as a child \u2013 protection from the whooping cough vaccine tends to wear off after a few years You can get whooping cough if you come into close contact with someone with the infection. A person with whooping cough is infectious from about six days after they were infected \u2013 when they just have cold-like symptoms \u2013 until three weeks after the coughing bouts start. Antibiotic treatment can reduce the length of time someone is infectious. When to get medical advice See your GP or call NHS 111 if you or your child: have symptoms of whooping cough have had a cough for more than three weeks have a cough that is particularly severe or is getting worse Call 999 or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if you or your child: have significant breathing difficulties, such as long periods of breathlessness or choking, shallow breathing, periods where breathing stops, or dusky, blue skin  develop signs of serious complications of whooping cough, such as fits (seizures) or pneumonia Treatment for whooping cough Treatment for whooping cough depends on your age and how long you've had the infection. Children under six months who are very ill and people with severe symptoms will usually be admitted to hospital for treatment. People diagnosed during the first three weeks of infection may be prescribed antibiotics to take at home \u2013 these will help stop the infection spreading to others, but may not reduce the symptoms. People who've had whooping cough for more than three weeks won't normally need any specific treatment, as they're no longer contagious and antibiotics are unlikely to help. While you're recovering at home, it can help to get plenty of rest, drink lots of fluids, clean away mucus and sick from your or your child's mouth, and take painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen for a fever. Avoid using cough medicines, as they're not suitable for young children and are unlikely to be of much help. Stopping the infection spreading If you or your child are taking antibiotics for whooping cough, you need to be careful not to spread the infection to others. Stay away from nursery, school or work until five days from the start of antibiotic treatment or three weeks after the coughing bouts started (whichever is sooner). Cover your or your child's mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing and sneezing. Dispose of used tissues immediately. Wash your and your child's hands regularly with soap and water. Other members of your household may also be given antibiotics and a dose of the whooping cough vaccine to stop them becoming infected. Vaccinations for whooping cough There are three routine vaccinations that can protect babies and children from whooping cough: the whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy \u2013 this can protect your baby during the first few weeks of life; the best time to have it is soon after the 20th week of your pregnancy the 5-in-1 vaccine \u2013 offered to babies at 8, 12 and 16 weeks of age the 4-in-1 pre-school booster \u2013 offered to children by 3 years and 4 months These vaccines don't offer lifelong protection from whooping cough, but they can help stop children getting it when they're young and more vulnerable to the effects of the infection. Older children and adults aren't routinely vaccinated, except during pregnancy or a whooping cough outbreak. Complications of whooping cough Babies and young children under six months are usually most severely affected by whooping cough. They're at an increased risk of: dehydration breathing difficulties weight loss pneumonia \u2013 an infection of the lungs fits (seizures) kidney problems brain damage caused by a lack of oxygen reaching the brain death \u2013 although this is very rare Older children and adults tend to be less severely affected, although they may experience problems caused by repeated coughing, such as nosebleeds, bruised ribs or a hernia. Page last reviewed: 24\/05\/2016 Next review due: 24\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 467 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 224  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cough Does your child have a serious illness? Whooping cough vaccination in pregnancy Kids: coughs, colds and ear infections What to do when your child has a minor illness such as a cough, cold, sore throat or ear infection Whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy Pregnant women are advised to be vaccinated against whooping cough to protect their baby's health NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Wind","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Flatulence","content":"Flatulence - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Flatulence  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Flatulence Clinical trials Flatulence Flatulence Causes Flatulence Treatment Introduction  Flatulence is passing gas from the digestive system out of the back passage. It's more commonly known as \"passing wind\", or \"farting\". Farting is often laughed about, but excessive flatulence can be embarrassing and make you feel uncomfortable around others. However, it can usually be controlled with changes to your diet and lifestyle. Flatulence is a normal biological process and is something everyone experiences regularly. Some people pass wind only a few times a day, others a lot more, but the average is said to be about 5 to 15 times a day. Why it happens When you swallow food, water or saliva, you also swallow small amounts of air, which collects in the digestive system. Gases can also build up when you digest food. The body needs to get rid of the build-up by farting (flatulence) or burping (belching). Sometimes you may not notice you have passed wind because most of the gases are odourless and often released in small quantities. Flatulence usually only has a bad smell if it contains gases that smell, such as sulphur. However, it's important to remember it's normal for the gas you pass to sometimes smell a bit. Excessive flatulence can be caused by swallowing more air than usual or eating food that's difficult to digest. It can also be related to an underlying health problem affecting the digestive system, such as recurring indigestion or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Read more about the causes of flatulence. When to see your GP There are no medical guidelines defining the normal frequency or volume of flatulence. You're probably the best person to assess your own symptoms. See your GP if your flatulence is particularly troublesome \u2013 for example, if you're frequently passing smelly gas. You should also visit your GP if you experience additional symptoms, such as: persistent abdominal pain and bloating recurring episodes of diarrhoea or constipation unexplained weight loss bowel incontinence  blood in your stools (faeces) signs of an infection, such as a high temperature, vomiting, chills, joint pain and muscle pain These symptoms could be an indicator of a more serious health problem and may require investigation, such as a blood or stool test to look for an infection. Controlling the problem Excessive flatulence can usually be controlled by making changes to your diet and lifestyle, such as: avoiding foods known to cause flatulence eating smaller and more frequent meals eating and drinking slowly exercising regularly There are also some over-the-counter medications that can help if your flatulence is troublesome, such as charcoal tablets or simethicone. If your flatulence is related to an underlying health problem, treating the condition may help resolve it. Read more about treating flatulence. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 20\/03\/2015 Next review due: 20\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 837 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 267  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 181  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 139  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 161  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coeliac disease Constipation Good food Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) Lactose intolerance External links Coeliac UK CORE: fighting gut and liver disease How to treat common digestive disorders Digestive complaints such as constipation, diarrhoea, heartburn and bloating are incredibly common but usually treatable Five top tips for a healthy tummy Five ways to banish common digestive problems such as heartburn, constipation and bloating Beat the bloat Tips for getting rid of bloating, including cutting out 'windy' foods and fizzy drinks, plus regular exercise NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Winter vomiting disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Norovirus","content":"Norovirus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Norovirus   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Norovirus Clinical trials Norovirus   Norovirus, which causes diarrhoea and vomiting, is one of the most common stomach bugs in the UK. It's also called the \"winter vomiting bug\" because it's more common in winter, although you can catch it at any time of the year. Norovirus can be very unpleasant but it usually clears up by itself in a few days. You can normally look after yourself or your child at home. Try to avoid going to your GP, as norovirus can spread to others very easily. Call your GP or NHS 111 if you're concerned or need any advice. This page covers: Symptoms of norovirus What to do if you have norovirus When to get medical advice How is norovirus spread? Preventing norovirus Symptoms of norovirus The symptoms of norovirus are very distinctive. You're likely to have norovirus if you experience: suddenly feeling sick projectile vomiting watery diarrhoea Some people also have a slight fever, headaches, painful stomach cramps and aching limbs. The symptoms appear one to two days after you become infected and typically last for up to two or three days. What to do if you have norovirus If you experience sudden diarrhoea and vomiting, the best thing to do is to stay at home until you're feeling better. There's no cure for norovirus, so you have to let it run its course. You don't usually need to get medical advice unless there's a risk of a more serious problem (see When to get medical advice). To help ease your own or your child\u2019s symptoms: Drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration. You need to drink more than usual to replace the fluids lost from vomiting and diarrhoea \u2013 as well as water, adults could also try fruit juice and soup. Avoid giving fizzy drinks or fruit juice to children as it can make their diarrhoea worse. Babies should continue to feed as usual, either with breast milk or other milk feeds. Take paracetamol for any fever or aches and pains. Get plenty of rest. If you feel like eating, eat plain foods, such as soup, rice, pasta and bread. Use special rehydration drinks made from sachets bought from pharmacies if you have signs of dehydration, such as a dry mouth or dark urine \u2013 read more about treating dehydration. Adults can take antidiarrhoeal and\/or anti-emetic (anti-vomiting) medication \u2013 these are not suitable for everyone though, so you should check the medicine leaflet or ask or your pharmacist or GP for advice before trying them. Babies and young children, especially if they're less than a year old, have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated. Read advice about looking after babies and children under five who have diarrhoea and vomiting. Norovirus can spread very easily, so you should wash your hands regularly while you're ill and stay off work or school until at least 48 hours after the symptoms have cleared, to reduce the risk of passing it on (see Preventing norovirus below). When to get medical advice You don't normally need to see your GP if you think you or your child has norovirus, as there's no specific treatment for it.  Antibiotics won't help because it's caused by a virus. Visiting your GP surgery with norovirus can put others at risk, so it's best to call your GP or NHS 111 if you're concerned or feel you need advice. Get medical advice if: your baby or child has passed six or more watery stools in the past 24 hours, or has vomited three times or more in the past 24 hours your baby or child is less responsive, feverish, or has pale or mottled skin you or your child has symptoms of severe dehydration, such as persistent dizziness, only passing small amounts of urine or no urine at all, or reduced consciousness \u2013 babies and elderly people have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated you have bloody diarrhoea your symptoms haven't started to improve after a few days you or your child have a serious underlying condition, such as kidney disease, and have diarrhoea and vomiting Your GP may suggest sending off a sample of your stool to a laboratory to confirm whether you have norovirus or another infection. How is norovirus spread? Norovirus spreads very easily in public places such as hospitals, nursing homes and schools. You can catch it if small particles of vomit or poo from an infected person get into your mouth, such as through: close contact with someone with norovirus \u2013 they may breathe out small particles containing the virus that you could inhale touching contaminated surfaces or objects \u2013 the virus can survive outside the body for several days eating contaminated food \u2013 this can happen if an infected person doesn't wash their hands before handling food A person with norovirus is most infectious from when their symptoms start until 48 hours after all their symptoms have passed, although they may also be infectious for a short time before and after this. You can get norovirus more than once because the virus is always changing, so your body is unable to build up long-term resistance to it. Preventing norovirus It's not always possible to avoid getting norovirus, but following the advice below can help stop the virus spreading. Stay off work or school until at least 48 hours after the symptoms have passed. You should also avoid visiting anyone in hospital during this time. Wash your hands frequently and thoroughly with soap and water, particularly after using the toilet and before preparing food. Don't rely on alcohol hand gels, as they do not kill the virus. Disinfect any surfaces or objects that could be contaminated. It's best to use a bleach-based household cleaner. Wash any items of clothing or bedding that could have become contaminated separately on a hot wash to ensure the virus is killed. Don't share towels and flannels. Flush away any infected poo or vomit in the toilet and clean the surrounding area. Avoid eating raw, unwashed produce and only eat oysters from a reliable source, as oysters can carry norovirus. Read more about preventing germs from spreading. Page last reviewed: 05\/10\/2015 Next review due: 05\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2750 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1695  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 553  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 284  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dehydration Diarrhoea Food safety Gastroenteritis News: norovirus outbreak External links Fit for Travel: norovirus Public Health England: norovirus leaflet (PDF, 270kb) Norovirus: schools guide (PDF, 1.7Mb) Looking after a sick child How to look after a sick child, including dealing with minor accidents and getting help How to prevent germs from spreading Cleaning and good hygiene tips to help reduce the number of germs in your home Food safety How to prevent food poisoning at home, including E. coli, with advice on food safety and keeping germs in check NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Wisdom tooth removal","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Wisdom-tooth-removal","content":"Wisdom tooth removal - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Wisdom tooth removal  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Wisdom-tooth-removal Clinical trials Wisdom tooth removal Wisdom-tooth-removal How it's performed Wisdom-tooth-removal Recovery Wisdom-tooth-removal Complications Introduction  The removal of wisdom teeth, or third molars, is one of the most common procedures carried out in the UK. The wisdom teeth grow at the back of your gums and are the last teeth to come through. Most people have four wisdom teeth \u2013 one in each corner. Wisdom teeth usually grow through the gums during the late teens or early twenties. By this time, the other 28 adult teeth are usually in place, so there isn't always enough room in the mouth for the wisdom teeth to grow properly. Because of the lack of space, the wisdom teeth can sometimes emerge at an angle or get stuck and only partially emerge. Wisdom teeth that grow through like this are known as impacted. When to see a dentist You should make an appointment to see your dentist if you're experiencing severe pain or discomfort from your wisdom teeth. Your dentist will check your teeth and advise you on whether they need to be removed. If your dentist thinks you may need your wisdom teeth removed, they'll usually carry out an X-ray of your mouth. This gives them a clearer view of the position of your teeth. As with any teeth problems, it's important to see your dentist as soon as possible, rather than waiting for your regular dental check-up. Why are wisdom teeth removed? Your wisdom teeth don't usually need to be removed if they're impacted but aren't causing any problems. This is because there's no proven benefit of doing this and it carries the risk of complications. Sometimes, wisdom teeth that have become impacted or haven't fully broken through the surface of the gum can cause dental problems. Food and bacteria can get trapped around the edge of the wisdom teeth, causing a build-up of plaque, which can lead to: tooth decay (dental caries) \u2013 this develops when plaque begins to break down the surface of your tooth. When tooth decay becomes more advanced, it leaves holes (cavities) in the tooth, which can affect the surrounding teeth.   gum disease (also called gingivitis or periodontal disease) \u2013 this occurs when plaque releases toxins that irritate your gums, making them red, swollen and painful. Gum disease can also affect the surrounding teeth and the bone around the wisdom teeth. pericoronitis \u2013 when plaque causes an infection of the soft tissue that surrounds the tooth. cellulitis \u2013 a bacterial infection in the cheek, tongue or throat. abscess \u2013 when pus collects in your wisdom teeth or the surrounding tissue due to a bacterial infection. cysts and benign growths \u2013 very rarely, a wisdom tooth that hasn't cut through the gum develops a cyst (a fluid-filled swelling). Many of these problems can be treated with treatment such as antibiotics and antiseptic mouthwash, so removing your wisdom teeth is only recommended when other treatment hasn't worked. How wisdom teeth are removed Your dentist may remove your wisdom teeth or they may refer you to a specialist surgeon for hospital treatment. Before the procedure, you'll usually be given a local anaesthetic injection to numb the area around the tooth. You'll feel some pressure just before the tooth is removed, as your dentist or oral surgeon needs to widen the tooth socket by rocking the tooth back and forth. In some cases a cut may be needed in your gum, and the tooth may need to be cut into smaller pieces before it's removed. The time it takes to remove the tooth will vary. Some procedures only take a few minutes, whereas others can take 20 minutes or longer.  After your wisdom teeth have been removed, you may experience swelling and discomfort, both on the inside and outside of your mouth. This is usually worse for the first three days, but it can last for up to two weeks. Read more about how a wisdom tooth is removed and recovering from wisdom tooth removal. Possible complications As with all surgery, there are risks associated with removing a wisdom tooth. These include infection or delayed healing, both of which are more likely if you smoke during your recovery. Another possible complication is \"dry socket\", which is a dull, aching sensation in your gum or jaw, and sometimes a bad smell or taste coming from the empty tooth socket. Dry socket is more likely if you don't follow the after-care instructions given by your dentist. There's also a small risk of nerve damage, which can cause pain or a tingling sensation and numbness in the tongue, lower lip, chin, teeth and gums. This is usually temporary, but can be permanent in some cases. Read more about the possible complications of wisdom tooth removal. Dental costs Dentists charge depending on the treatment required, unless you're under 18 or otherwise exempt from NHS charges. If hospital treatment is required, it will be provided through the NHS free of charge. Read more about dental costs and find your local dental surgery. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2015 Next review due: 20\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 464 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 250  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Wisdom teeth Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A consultant oral and maxillofacial surgeon explains why people have problems with their wisdom teeth, the treatments available and the important things to ask before treatment. Media last reviewed: 24\/08\/2015 Next review due: 24\/08\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Dental health Find dentists Local anaesthetic Tooth decay Toothache External links British Dental Health Foundation: wisdom teeth NICE: wisdom tooth removal Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening Fear of the dentist Terrified of the dentist? Find out how to overcome your fear Find and choose services for Wisdom tooth removal Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome","content":"Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome Clinical trials Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome Introduction  Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome is a heart condition that causes the heart to beat abnormally fast for periods of time. It's a relatively common condition, affecting between one and three in every 1,000 people. The cause is an extra electrical connection in the heart. This problem with the heart is present at birth (congenital), although symptoms may not develop until later in life. Many cases are diagnosed in otherwise healthy adults aged between 20 and 40. Sometimes the extra electrical connection won't cause any symptoms and may only be picked up when an electrocardiogram (ECG) test is carried out for another reason. In these cases, further tests will be done to determine if treatment is required. Is it serious? It can be scary to be told that you have a problem with your heart, but WPW syndrome usually isn't serious. Many people will have no symptoms or only experience occasional, mild episodes of their heart racing. With treatment, the condition can normally be completely cured. WPW syndrome can sometimes be life-threatening, particularly if it occurs alongside a type of irregular heartbeat called atrial fibrillation. But this is rare and treatment can eliminate this risk. Symptoms of WPW syndrome If you have WPW syndrome, you'll experience episodes where your heart suddenly starts racing, before stopping or slowing down abruptly. This rapid heart rate is called supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). During an episode, you may experience symptoms such as: a pounding or fluttering heartbeat (heart palpitations) feeling light-headed or dizzy shortness of breath chest pain sweating feeling anxious finding physical activity exhausting passing out (fainting) These episodes can last for seconds, minutes or hours. Rarely, they can last for days. How often they occur varies from person to person. Some people may have episodes on a daily basis, while others may only experience them a few times a year. They normally occur randomly, without any identifiable cause, but they can sometimes be triggered by strenuous exercise or drinking a lot of alcohol or caffeine. When to seek medical advice If you haven't been diagnosed with WPW syndrome, you should contact your GP or call NHS 111 as soon as possible if your heart starts beating unusually fast and you have any of the above symptoms. Dial 999 for an ambulance if your symptoms are particularly severe or long-lasting. If you've already been diagnosed with WPW syndrome and you experience an episode, first try the techniques you've been taught or take any medication you've been given (see below). Dial 999 or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if these measures don't stop the episode within a few minutes, or if someone you know has WPW syndrome and collapses or faints. What causes WPW syndrome? When the heart beats, its muscular walls contract (tighten and squeeze) to force blood out and around the body. They then relax, allowing the heart to fill with blood again. This is controlled by electrical signals. In WPW syndrome, there's an extra electrical connection in the heart, which allows electrical signals to bypass the usual route and form a short circuit. This means the signals travel round and round in a loop, causing episodes where the heart beats very fast. The extra electrical connection is caused by a strand of heart muscle that grows while the unborn baby is developing in the womb. It's not clear exactly why this happens. It just seems to occur randomly in some babies, although rare cases have been found to run in families. Diagnosing WPW syndrome If your doctor thinks you might have WPW syndrome after assessing your symptoms, they'll probably recommend having an electrocardiogram (ECG) and will refer you to a cardiologist (heart specialist). An ECG is a test that records your heart's rhythm and electrical activity. Small discs called electrodes are stuck onto your arms, legs and chest and connected by wires to an ECG machine. The machine records the tiny electrical signals produced by your heart each time it beats. If you have WPW syndrome, the ECG will record an unusual pattern that isn't usually present in people who don't have the condition. To confirm the diagnosis, you may be asked to wear a small portable ECG recorder so your heart rhythm can be recorded during an episode. The recorder will trace your heart rate continuously over a few days, or when you switch it on at the start of an episode. Treatments for WPW syndrome In many cases, episodes of abnormal heart activity associated with WPW syndrome are harmless, don't last long, and settle down on their own without treatment. You may therefore not need any treatment if your symptoms are mild or occur very occasionally, although you should still have regular check-ups so your heart can be monitored. If your cardiologist recommends treatment, there are a number of options available. You can have treatment to either stop episodes when they occur, or prevent them occurring in the future. Stopping an episode There are three main techniques and treatments that can help stop episodes as they occur. These are: Vagal manoeuvres \u2013 techniques designed to stimulate the nerve that slows down the electrical signals in your heart. An example is the 'Valsalva manoeuvre', where you hold your nose, close your mouth and exhale hard while straining as if you're on the toilet. Medication \u2013 an injection of medicine such as adenosine can be given in hospital if vagal manoeuvres don't help. It can block the abnormal electrical signals in your heart. Cardioversion \u2013 a type of electric shock therapy that jolts the heart back into a normal rhythm. This may be carried out in hospital if the above treatments don't work. Preventing further episodes Techniques and treatments that can help prevent episodes include: Lifestyle changes \u2013 if your episodes are triggered by things such as strenuous exercise or alcohol, avoiding these may help. Your cardiologist can advise you about this. Medication \u2013 daily tablets of medication such as amiodarone can help prevent episodes by slowing down the electrical impulses in your heart. Catheter ablation \u2013 this procedure is commonly used nowadays to destroy the extra part of the heart causing the problems in the heart's electrical system. It's effective in around 95% of cases. See treating supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) for more information about all the treatments mentioned here. Information about you If you have Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 04\/09\/2015 Next review due: 04\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 309 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 225  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your guide to EPS (electrophysiology) and ablation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Do you have an EPS test or ablation treatment coming up? Watch this video to find out what to expect. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Arrhythmia Heart health Supraventricular tachycardia External links Arrthymia Alliance British Heart Foundation Supraventricular tachycardia Supraventricular tachycardia is a heart rhythm disorder that causes the heart to beat abnormally fast Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Womb cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-uterus","content":"Womb (uterus) cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Womb (uterus) cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-uterus Community Womb (uterus) cancer Cancer-of-the-uterus Symptoms Cancer-of-the-uterus Causes Cancer-of-the-uterus Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-uterus Treatment Cancer-of-the-uterus Living with Introduction  Cancer of the womb (uterus) is a common cancer that affects the female reproductive system. It's also called uterine cancer and endometrial cancer. Abnormal vaginal bleeding is the most common symptom of womb cancer. If you have been through the menopause, any vaginal bleeding is considered abnormal. If you have not yet been through the menopause, unusual bleeding may include bleeding between your periods. You should see your GP as soon as possible if you experience any unusual vaginal bleeding. While it's unlikely to be caused by womb cancer, it's best to be sure. Your GP will examine you and ask about your symptoms. They will refer you to a specialist for further tests if they suspect you may have a serious problem, or if they are unsure about a diagnosis. Read more about the symptoms of womb cancer and diagnosing womb cancer. Types of womb cancer The vast majority of womb cancers begin in the cells that make up the lining of the womb (called the endometrium), which is why cancer of the womb is often called endometrial cancer. In rare cases, womb cancer can start in the muscles surrounding the womb. This type of cancer is called uterine sarcoma and may be treated in a different way from endometrial cancer. This article uses the term womb cancer, and mostly includes information about endometrial cancer. Read more information about soft tissue sarcomas. Womb cancer is separate from other cancers of the female reproductive system, such as ovarian cancer and cervical cancer. Why does womb cancer happen? It's not clear exactly what causes womb cancer, but certain things can increase your risk of developing the condition. A hormone imbalance is one of the most important risks for womb cancer. Specifically, your risk is increased if you have high levels of a hormone called oestrogen in your body. A number of things can cause this hormone imbalance, including obesity, diabetes, and hormone replacement therapy (HRT). There is also a small increase in the risk of womb cancer with long-term use of the breast cancer drug tamoxifen. It's not always possible to prevent womb cancer, but some things are thought to reduce your risk. This includes maintaining a healthy weight and the long-term use of some types of contraception. Read more about the causes of womb cancer and preventing womb cancer. How is womb cancer treated? The most common treatment for womb cancer is the surgical removal of the womb (hysterectomy). A hysterectomy can cure womb cancer in its early stages, but you will no longer be able to get pregnant. Surgery for womb cancer is also likely to include the removal of the ovaries and fallopian tubes. Radiotherapy or chemotherapy are also sometimes used, often in conjunction with surgery. A type of hormone therapy may be used if you are yet to go through the menopause and would still like to have children. Even if your cancer is advanced and the chances of a cure are small, treatment can still help to relieve symptoms and prolong your life. Read more about treating womb cancer. Living with womb cancer Living with cancer is challenging and womb cancer can affect your life in specific ways. For example, your sex life may be affected if you have a hysterectomy. You may find it physically more difficult to have sex and have a reduced sex drive. You may find it beneficial to talk to other people about your condition, including family members, your partner, or other people with womb cancer. Read more about living with womb cancer. Who is affected? Womb cancer is the most commonly occurring cancer of the female reproductive system. It's the fourth most common cancer diagnosed in women after breast cancer, lung cancer, and cancer of the colon and rectum. In the UK, about 8,475 new cases of womb cancer are diagnosed each year. Womb cancer is more common in women who have been through the menopause, and most cases are diagnosed in women aged 40 to 74. Womb cancer accounts for about 3% of all cancers diagnosed in women. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Page last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 243 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bleeding or spotting after the menopause Cancer support services Care and support Cervical cancer Hysterectomy Ovarian cancer Women's health 40-60 Women's health over-60s External links Cancer Research UK: womb cancer The Eve Appeal: womb cancer Macmillan: cancer of the womb My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Find and choose services for Uterine (uterus) cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Work related upper limb disorder (WRULD)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Repetitive-strain-injury","content":"Repetitive strain injury (RSI) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Repetitive strain injury (RSI)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Repetitive-strain-injury Clinical trials Repetitive strain injury Repetitive-strain-injury Diagnosis Repetitive-strain-injury Treatment Introduction  Repetitive strain injury (RSI) is a general term used to describe the pain felt in muscles, nerves and tendons caused by repetitive movement and overuse. It's also known as work-related upper limb disorder, or non-specific upper limb pain. The condition mostly affects parts of the upper body, such as the: forearms and elbows wrists and hands neck and shoulders Symptoms of RSI The symptoms of RSI can range from mild to severe and usually develop gradually. They often include: pain, aching or tenderness stiffness throbbing tingling or numbness weakness cramp At first, you might only notice symptoms when you're carrying out a particular repetitive action. But without treatment, the symptoms of RSI may eventually become constant and cause longer periods of pain. You may also get swelling in the affected area, which can last for several months. What to do if you think you have RSI If you develop symptoms of RSI and think it may be related to your job, speak to your employer or occupational health representative. It may be possible to modify your tasks to improve your symptoms.  See your GP if symptoms continue, despite attempts to change how you work. Read more about diagnosing RSI. What causes RSI? RSI is related to the overuse of muscles and tendons in the upper body. Certain things are thought to increase the risk of RSI, including: repetitive activities doing a high-intensity activity for a long time without rest poor posture or activities that require you to work in an awkward position Cold temperatures and vibrating equipment are also thought to increase the risk of getting RSI and can make the symptoms worse. Stress can also be a contributing factor. A variety of jobs can lead to RSI, such as working at an assembly line, at a supermarket checkout or typing at a computer. It's important to work in a comfortable environment which has been appropriately adjusted. Your employer has a legal duty to try to prevent work-related RSI and ensure anyone who already has the condition doesn't get any worse. Read more about workplace health. How RSI is treated The first step in treating RSI is usually to identify and modify the task or activity that is causing the symptoms. If necessary, you may need to stop doing the activity altogether. To relieve symptoms, your GP may advise taking a course of anti-inflammatory painkillers (such as aspirin or ibuprofen), or using a heat or cold pack, elastic support or splint. You may also be referred to a physiotherapist for advice on posture and how to strengthen or relax your muscles. Some people find that other types of therapy help to relieve symptoms, including massage, yoga and osteopathy. Read more about treating RSI. How to prevent RSI Most employers carry out a risk assessment when you join a company to check that your work area is suitable and comfortable for you. You can request an assessment if you haven't had one. There are also things you can do to help reduce your risk of RSI, such as: maintaining good posture at work \u2013 see how to sit at a desk correctly  taking regular breaks from long or repetitive tasks \u2013 it's better to take smaller, more frequent breaks than one long lunch break trying relaxation techniques if you're stressed If you work at a computer all day, make sure your seat, keyboard, mouse and screen are positioned so they cause the least amount of strain. See tips on preventing RSI for more detailed advice about using a mouse and keyboard at work. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1414 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 387  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 753  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Healthy back at work Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Trevor Shaw, principal ergonomist, explains how bad posture contributes to health problems including back pain. He describes how to improve your health at work. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Carpal tunnel syndrome Physiotherapy Tendonitis External links Health and Safety Executive Workplace health Improve your health at work, with tips on dealing with stress, RSI, back pain, exercise and healthy lunches Tips to prevent RSI Prevent repetitive strain injury (RSI), with tips on relaxation, checking your workstation, and adjusting your computer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Wrist, broken","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/broken-arm","content":"Broken arm or wrist - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Broken arm or wrist  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Broken arm Introduction  A broken arm or wrist is usually caused by a fall onto an outstretched arm. It typically takes about six to eight weeks to heal in adults, and less time in children. Doctors refer to all breaks or cracks in bones as fractures. Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if you think you or your child has broken a bone. If the injury is severe, dial 999 for an ambulance. If it feels like only a minor fracture and it is not an emergency, it may be more appropriate to go to a minor injuries unit. How can I tell if the arm or wrist is broken? A broken arm or wrist bone will be extremely painful and there may also be: swelling or tenderness around the injured area bleeding, if the bone has damaged the tissue and skin These symptoms may also occur if your arm or wrist is sprained rather than broken (read about sprains and strains). An X-ray in hospital is the only way to confirm whether or not the bone is broken. If it's a clean break, you may have heard a snap or a grinding noise during the accident. The bone can break straight across, diagonally, or in a spiral pattern. In severe cases, the bone may break into many pieces (comminuted), stick out at an angle or poke through the skin (open or compound fracture). What you can do It's important not to eat or drink anything if you think you've broken your arm because you may need a general anaesthetic so that the bone can be realigned. Before reaching hospital, a sling may help stabilise the arm (this goes under the arm and around the neck). Avoid trying to straighten the arm. Applying an ice pack, such as a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel, to the injured area can help reduce pain and swelling. If your child has injured their arm or wrist, try to get someone else to drive so you can support and comfort them. How a broken arm or wrist is treated A broken arm or wrist is usually treated in a hospital accident and emergency department. The treatment differs depending on the severity of the injury. A doctor will give you or your child painkillers and fix a splint to the arm to secure it in position and prevent further damage. An X-ray of the arm will then be taken to see what kind of fracture it is. Even hairline fractures show faintly on X-ray. A simple fracture, where the bone remains aligned, can be treated by applying a plaster cast. This holds the broken ends together so they can heal. You'll be given painkillers to take home and be told how to look after your cast. An appointment will be made to attend a fracture clinic so specialist orthopaedic doctors can take over the care of your fracture. With more severe arm or wrist fractures, the bones can become misaligned (displaced). If the bone isn't realigned (reduced), the bones won't heal well. Doctors use a technique called \"closed reduction\" to pull the bones back into position. Local or regional anaesthetic will be used to numb the arm (this is rarely used in children), or you'll be put to sleep using a general anaesthetic. If doctors are happy with the bones' new position, a plaster cast will be applied and you'll have regular follow-up appointments and X-rays. Certain fractures are best treated with surgery to realign and fix the broken bones. This includes displaced fractures, fractures involving a joint, and open fractures. Surgeons can fix bones with wires, plates, screws or rods. This is called open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). Any metalwork isn't usually removed unless it becomes a problem. In rare cases, an external frame, known as an external fixator, is used to hold the broken bones in place. After most types of surgery, a plaster cast is applied to protect the repair. A sling may also be provided for comfort. You'll usually be able to go home within a day or two of having surgery. Recovering from a broken arm or wrist The plaster cast will need to stay on until the bone has healed. The length of time it will take to heal will depend on the type of fracture, whether it's damaged the surrounding tissues, and the person's age. For example, a young child who's cracked their wrist will need to wear a cast or removable splint for just two to three weeks. However, in older people, a wrist injury can take much longer to heal and stiffness is very common. A useful rule of thumb is that the time taken for the bone to regain full strength is usually the same as the time it takes for the fracture to heal. That is, if you\u2019ve been in plaster for six weeks, it will take six weeks to regain full strength. It's important not to get a plaster cast wet. Read more about how should I care for my plaster cast? for further information and advice. The orthopaedic doctors will decide when you can take the cast off and when you can return to work and normal activities. Your arm may be stiff and weak after being in a cast. Physiotherapy can help build strength in the arm muscles and restore full movement. However, it's rarely needed for children. The risk of re-breaking or cracking the bone after the plaster cast is removed is increased, particularly in children. Children should avoid using trampolines, bouncy castles, soft play areas and playing contact sports for a further two to three weeks to minimise this risk. Adults shouldn't drive while their arm is in a cast. Ask your doctor for advice about when you can drive again. Useful terms humerus \u2013 the bone between the shoulder and elbow radius \u2013 the bone between the elbow and wrist (thumb side of the arm) ulna \u2013 the bone between the elbow and wrist (little-finger side of the arm) simple or closed fracture \u2013 an easily treated break with little damage to the surrounding tissue compound or open fracture \u2013 a complicated break with damage to the surrounding skin comminuted fracture \u2013 where the bone has broken into several pieces hairline fracture \u2013 a minor crack to the bone which only shows up faintly on X-ray Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2015 Next review due: 27\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 983 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 329  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 229  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 235  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Can I fly if I have a plaster cast? Find A&E services How should I care for my plaster cast? External links RoSPA: trampoline safety St John Ambulance: broken bones and fractures First aid What to do if someone is injured in an accident X-ray An X-ray is a common procedure used to produce images of the inside of the body About A&E departments Find out when it is appropriate to go to A&E and what other services offer urgent care NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}