{"conditions":[{"name":"Q fever","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Q-Fever","content":"Q fever - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Q fever  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Q-Fever Clinical trials Q Fever Introduction  Q fever is a bacterial infection that can be spread to humans by infected animals \u2013 most commonly by sheep, cattle and goats. The infection is found worldwide, but cases in humans are rare in the UK. Around 50 cases of Q fever are reported in the UK each year. Most people with Q fever will either have no symptoms, or will only have mild flu-like symptoms that pass within two weeks. However, the symptoms can sometimes last several months, and occasionally the infection can lead to life-threatening problems if it spreads to other parts of the body, such as the heart. If you get Q fever while pregnant, your baby may be born early or have a low birthweight, and there is a risk of having a miscarriage or stillbirth. How Q fever is spread Q fever is caused by Coxiella burnetii (C. burnetii) bacteria. The animals that pose the biggest risk to humans are: sheep cows goats domesticated pets \u2013 such as cats, dogs and rabbits The bacteria can be found in an infected animal's milk, blood, urine, poo, and birth by-products \u2013 such as the afterbirth (placenta). Birth products pose the greatest risk, because they can contain a high number of bacteria. The bacteria can be spread to humans by: breathing in particles released by infected animals \u2013 particularly when animals are being slaughtered or giving birth breathing in particles of contaminated soil, dust, hay or straw bedding infected particles coming into contact with your eyes or a cut in your skin drinking unpasteurised milk from an infected animal being bitten by an infected tick \u2013 although this is very rare and there have not been any recorded cases of this in the UK It's also possible, although incredibly rare, for Q fever to spread between people through sexual intercourse or by a pregnant woman passing the infection to her unborn child. Who's most at risk? People who work closely with livestock are most at risk, such as: farmers stablehands abattoir workers meat packers vets You're also more vulnerable to the infection, and more likely to experience complications, if you have a history of heart valve disease, a weakened immune system (for example, because of chemotherapy), or you're pregnant. Signs and symptoms Q fever doesn't always cause symptoms. If you do develop symptoms, this is usually within two to three weeks of infection. The main symptoms of Q fever include: a high temperature (fever) severe headaches muscle and joint pain sweats a sore throat weight loss In some cases, the infection can also cause problems such as pneumonia. Symptoms can include a dry cough and a sharp chest pain made worse by breathing deeply, coughing or laughing. These problems usually pass within two weeks and most people will make a full recovery. Occasionally, however, symptoms of Q fever last six months or more. This is known as chronic Q fever, and it can cause you to feel tired and generally unwell for a long time. In rare cases, it can lead to a serious problem where the inner lining of the heart becomes inflamed (endocarditis). When to seek medical advice You should see your GP if you develop severe or persistent symptoms of Q fever, or you're pregnant and are worried you may have been exposed to the infection. Your GP may suspect Q fever if you have recently been in close contact with potentially infected material, such as animal birth products, and the diagnosis can usually be confirmed with a blood test. Treating Q fever Q fever usually lasts for about two weeks and often gets better without treatment, although you may need to take antibiotics for 7-14 days if your symptoms are severe or don't improve. If you are prescribed antibiotics, it's important that you finish the whole course, even if you feel better. Long-term Q fever is usually much more difficult to treat, and treatment normally involves taking a combination of antibiotics for at least 18 months. If you develop any serious complications, such as endocarditis, you may need to be treated in hospital. Read more about treating endocarditis. Preventing Q fever A vaccine for Q fever isn\u2019t available in the UK, so the best way to avoid the infection is to reduce your exposure to potentially infected material. If you work with animals, you should: wash your hands thoroughly and regularly clean new wounds immediately and cover any existing wounds wear appropriate protective clothing, such as waterproof gloves and goggles avoid eating in potentially contaminated areas ensure all animal birth products are disposed of properly You can also reduce your risk of getting Q fever by avoiding unpasteurised milk and dairy products, and by not touching anything that may have been in contact with animal blood, poo or urine. Pregnant women should avoid contact with sheep and lambs during lambing season (January to April) in particular, and should avoid handling clothing, boots and other items that have come into contact with ewes or lambs. Further information: Why should pregnant women avoid sheep during the lambing season? What infections can animals pass to people? How can I avoid catching an infection from an animal? Page last reviewed: 09\/02\/2015 Next review due: 09\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 20 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Infections that may affect your baby Risks to pregnant women during the lambing season External links GOV.UK: Q fever (PDF, 119kb) Infections in pregnancy How to protect against infections that might affect your baby, such as CMV, toxoplasmosis and rubella UK insects that bite or sting Get the lowdown on our most pesky creatures, such as wasps, bees, spiders, ladybirds, midges and mosquitoes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Quinsy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Quinsy","content":"Quinsy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Quinsy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Quinsy Clinical trials Quinsy Introduction  Quinsy, also known as a peritonsillar abscess, is a rare and potentially serious complication of tonsillitis. The abscess (a collection of pus) forms between one of your tonsils and the wall of your throat. This can happen when a bacterial infection spreads from an infected tonsil to the surrounding area. Quinsy can occur at any age, but most commonly affects teenagers and young adults. It's possible to get it more than once. Signs and symptoms Symptoms of quinsy can include: a severe and quickly worsening sore throat, usually on one side swelling inside the mouth and throat difficulty opening your mouth pain when swallowing difficulty swallowing, which may cause you to drool changes to your voice or difficulty speaking bad breath earache on the affected side headache and feeling generally unwell difficulty breathing Some people with quinsy may also have a high temperature (fever), although this sometimes passes before the abscess develops. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you or your child have symptoms of quinsy. Your GP will ask you about your symptoms and examine your throat and tonsils. These are the two small glands found at the back of your throat, behind your tongue. If quinsy is suspected, you will be referred immediately to a hospital ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist for further tests and treatment. It's important that quinsy is diagnosed and treated quickly to prevent the infection from spreading and to avoid serious problems caused by severe swelling, such as breathing difficulties. Treating quinsy People with quinsy usually need to be treated in hospital. Depending on how severe the infection is, you may need to stay in hospital for a few days and rest at home for a week or two afterwards. Medication You will be given antibiotics to clear the infection. These will usually be given directly into a vein (intravenously) at first, but you may switch to a short course of tablets or capsules once you are well enough leave hospital. Painkillers, such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, will be given to help ease any pain. You can continue to take these while you recover at home if necessary. Occasionally, corticosteroid medication may also be used to help reduce the swelling in your throat. Surgery and procedures In many cases, antibiotics alone are not effective, and it may be necessary to drain the pus from the abscess. This can be done by: needle aspiration \u2013 a long, fine needle is used to draw out the pus incision and drainage \u2013 a small cut (incision) is made over the affected area to drain the pus a tonsillectomy \u2013 an operation to remove your tonsils (this is rarely necessary while you have quinsy, but is often recommended at least six weeks after you\u2019ve recovered) You will often remain awake during a needle aspiration or incision and drainage procedure, but you will be given either a sedative to help you relax and\/or a local anaesthetic to numb the area being treated. Tonsillectomies and some incision and drainage procedures are carried out under general anaesthetic. This means you will be asleep and won't feel any pain while these procedures are carried out. Preventing quinsy One of the best ways to prevent quinsy is to reduce your risk of developing tonsillitis. You can help do this by avoiding close contact with people who have viral or bacterial infections that cause tonsillitis, regularly washing your hands with soap and warm water, and not sharing glasses or utensils with people who are ill. Smoking may increase your risk of quinsy, so stopping smoking may reduce your chances of getting it. Using antibiotics to treat viral tonsillitis doesn't significantly reduce the risk of quinsy and isn't routinely recommended. Page last reviewed: 08\/12\/2014 Next review due: 08\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 622 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 358  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 148  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Sore throat Streptococcal infections Tonsillitis What if I miss a dose of antibiotics? The Antibiotic Awareness Campaign External links KidsHealth: tonsillitis Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections Your hospital stay Find out what to expect if you are admitted as inpatient to an NHS hospital, including advice about consent to treatment NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Quitting smoking","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/smoking\/Pages\/stopsmokingnewhome.aspx","content":"Stop smoking - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stop smoking Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Get help NOW to stop smoking Want to stop smoking? Find out practical, quick and simple steps you can take NOW to quit successfully. 10 health benefits of stopping smoking Quit smoking and you'll be healthier, your skin will look better, and you'll have better sex. Stop smoking treatments Find out about the medications that can help if you want to stop smoking, including nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), bupropion (Zyban) and varenicline (Champix). NHS stop smoking services help you quit Using an NHS stop smoking service is free and will massively boost your chances of quitting. Using e-cigarettes to stop smoking Find out about e-cigarettes and how to use them to help you stop smoking. 10 self-help tips to stop smoking Some small changes to your lifestyle may help you resist the temptation to light up. Stop smoking without putting on weight Most people put on weight when they quit smoking, but you can take these steps to prevent piling on the pounds. Stopping smoking is good for your mental health Being smoke-free helps relieve the symptoms of stress, anxiety and depression 8 key times to quit smoking Eight key life events that are a great motivation to quit for good including going into hospital and becoming a grandparent. Stop smoking: coping with cravings Control your cigarette cravings with self help tips and stop smoking treatments. 10 myths about stop smoking treatments Find out 10 common myths about stop smoking treatments, and the truth behind them. Stop smoking: quit making excuses The seven top excuses smokers use to avoid stopping smoking, and how to overcome them. How your GP can help you quit Dr Michael Apple explains what GPs can do to help patients quit smoking, hopefully for good. What to do if you relapse after quitting Don\u2019t be put off trying to quit if you relapse. The key is to learn from what went wrong so you\u2019re more likely to succeed next time. Passive smoking: protect your family and friends How to protect others from secondhand smoke. Includes advice on e-cigs. 'How I quit smoking' Find out how ex-smoker Justine quit smoking with the help of an NHS Stop Smoking group. Ask the GP: smoking Q&As Does smoking cause indigestion? How does it affect the heart? Why is it hard to stop? A GP explains Under-18s guide to quitting smoking Seven reasons for teen smokers to quit, and eight ways to help yourself through it. Paan, bidi and shisha Paan, bidi and shisha all have health risks. Get help quitting using these leaflets in Bengali, Urdu, Punjabi, Hindi and Gujarati. 'I quit smoking for my son' The health risks of smoking, and why one mum from London quit after 26 years. Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Lung cancer: are you at risk? The facts about lung cancer, including how to tell if you're at risk, even if you don't smoke Call your GP today If you've been coughing for 3 weeks or more, tell your doctor. Call your GP today Stop smoking in pregnancy Find out how smoking affects your baby when you're pregnant, and the support available to help you stop Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find stop smoking services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/servicedirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=StopSmokingService","content":"Find services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Find services You can search all of our service directories from here. Try searching by service name, service type, condition or surgical procedure. Find services Find Location Locate me or browse the Services A-Z Need urgent care? Use our service finder to locate your nearest urgent care health services Open data for better services See the data used to monitor and shape services NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}