{"conditions":[{"name":"Zika virus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/zika-virus","content":"Zika virus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Zika virus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Zika virus Introduction  Zika virus disease is mainly spread by mosquitoes. For most people it is a very mild infection and isn't harmful. However, it may be more serious for pregnant women, as there's evidence it causes birth defects \u2013 in particular, abnormally small heads (microcephaly). Zika does not naturally occur in the UK. Zika outbreaks have been reported in the Pacific region, and the virus has now spread to South and Central America and the Caribbean. Experts predict that Zika virus will spread to all countries in the Americas (including the Caribbean), with the exception of Chile and Canada. People travelling to affected areas should seek travel health advice before their trip. You can use this AZ guide to check if the country you are visiting has a high risk, medium risk or low risk for Zika virus transmission. It is recommended that pregnant women postpone non-essential travel to areas with active Zika virus transmission. These are areas where cases of Zika virus disease have been acquired locally, through mosquito bites, and reported by health authorities within the last three months. If you travel to an affected area, you can reduce your risk of catching the virus by using insect repellent and wearing loose clothing that covers your arms and legs. Read on to find out: Symptoms of Zika virus infection How you catch Zika virus infection Reducing your risk of Zika virus infection Advice for pregnant women If you are trying to get pregnant How Zika virus infection is treated Zika virus and blood donation  Zika virus and Guillain-Barré syndrome Information about you Further reading  Symptoms of Zika virus infection Most people don't have any symptoms. If symptoms do occur, they are usually mild and last around two to seven days. Commonly reported symptoms include: rash itching all over the body fever headache joint pain (with possible swelling, mainly in the smaller joints of the hands and feet) muscle pain conjunctivitis (red eyes) lower back pain pain behind the eyes How you catch Zika virus infection Most cases of Zika virus disease are spread by infected mosquitoes biting humans. Unlike the mosquitoes that spread malaria, affected mosquitoes (the Aedes mosquito) are most active during the day, especially during mid-morning, then late-afternoon to dusk. There have been a small number of reports of Zika virus being passed on through sexual intercourse, although the risk is thought to be low. Reducing your risk of Zika virus infection  Before travelling, seek travel health advice from your GP\/practice nurse or a travel clinic ideally four to six weeks before you go. Detailed travel health advice for your destination is also available from the National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) website or the Scottish travel health service fitfortravel. To reduce your risk of infection, you should avoid being bitten by an Aedes mosquito. The most effective bite prevention methods, which should be used during daytime and night-time hours, include: Using insect repellent that contains DEET (N, N-diethyl-meta-toluamide) on exposed skin, after sunscreen has been applied. DEET can be used by pregnant or breastfeeding women in concentrations up to 50%, and in infants and children older than two months. It should not be used on babies younger than two months. Wearing loose clothing that covers your arms and legs. Sleeping under a mosquito net in areas where malaria is also a risk. Advice for pregnant women  Scientists believe that there is enough evidence to show that Zika virus infection is a cause of birth defects, including microcephaly (this means the baby will have an abnormally small head and can be associated with abnormal brain development). This is also known as congenital Zika syndrome. It is therefore recommended that pregnant women postpone non-essential travel to areas with active Zika transmission until after pregnancy. Discuss your travel plans with your GP, practice nurse or a travel clinic. If travel is unavoidable, then you should take extra care to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes. Public Health England (PHE) provides regular updates about the current spread of the disease. If you and your partner are currently in an area with active Zika virus transmission, make sure you use condoms during vaginal, anal and oral sex while travelling and for the duration of your pregnancy. If you are pregnant and have recently returned from an area with active Zika virus transmission, see your GP or midwife and mention where you have been, even if you have not been unwell. Your midwife or hospital doctor will discuss the risk with you and can arrange an ultrasound scan of your baby to monitor growth. If there are any issues, you will be referred to a specialist foetal medicine service for further monitoring. Zika virus is most likely to be detected by currently available tests when symptoms are present. If you are currently experiencing Zika symptoms, contact your GP, who will decide whether investigations are necessary. Investigations might include a blood test and\/or an ultrasound test if you are pregnant. Advice for women trying to get pregnant If you are trying to get pregnant, discuss your travel plans with your GP, practice nurse or travel clinic. You should take extra care to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes. It is recommended that you avoid becoming pregnant while travelling to an area with active Zika virus transmission, and for eight weeks after you return home. It is also recommended that you take folic acid supplements for 28 days before trying to get pregnant. If you have experienced Zika symptoms within two weeks of returning home, it is recommended that you wait at least eight weeks after full recovery before you try to get pregnant. If your partner has travelled to an area with active Zika virus transmission, you should use effective contraception to prevent pregnancy and condoms during vaginal, anal and oral sex to reduce the risk of sexual transmission. These measures should be taken during travel and: for eight weeks after his return home, even if he has no Zika symptoms for six months following the start of his symptoms, if he does experience Zika symptoms or a Zika virus infection has been confirmed by a doctor How Zika virus infection is treated There is no specific treatment for Zika virus symptoms. Drinking plenty of water and taking paracetamol may help relieve symptoms. If you feel unwell after returning from a country that has malaria as well as active transmission of Zika virus, you should seek urgent (same day) advice to help rule out a malaria diagnosis. If you remain unwell and malaria has been shown not to be the cause, seek medical advice. What if I'm worried that my baby has been affected by Zika? Speak to your midwife or doctor for advice. If you are still concerned after receiving assurances from your healthcare professional and feel anxious or stressed more than usual, you can ask your GP or midwife for referral to further counselling.  Zika virus and blood donation As a precaution, the NHS Blood and Transplant service has recommended that people who have travelled to areas with active Zika virus transmission wait 28 days before donating blood. If you want to know whether any recent foreign travel temporarily bars you from giving blood, you can call their National Contact Centre on 0300 123 23 23. Zika virus and Guillain-Barré syndrome Scientists now believe that Zika virus is a cause of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), a serious condition of the nervous system. The risk of developing GBS following a Zika virus infection is currently unknown, but thought to be very low.  Information about you If you have been infected with Zika virus, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Further reading Public Health England. Zika virus: travel advice for pregnant women. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Q&As on Zika and pregnancy. World Health Organization. Zika virus fact sheet. Travel Health Pro. Zika virus \u2013 update and advice for travellers including pregnant women. European Center for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Countries with active Zika virus transmission. Best use of medicines in pregnancy. Zika virus. Page last reviewed: 12\/02\/2016 Next review due: 12\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 80 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links News: Zika virus 'does cause birth defects' News: 'Strong evidence' of Zika virus and Guillain-Barré syndrome link News: Zika virus epidemic to last 'another three years' Find your GP External links Zika virus: travel advice for pregnant women \u2013 Public Health England Areas with active Zika transmission \u2013 ECDC Zika virus \u2013 WHO Travel in pregnancy How to travel safely and comfortably, and when you might need a doctor's note Insect bites and stings Find out about some of the most common insect bites and stings, how they're treated and when to get medical advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}