{"conditions":[{"name":"Japanese encephalitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/japanese-encephalitis","content":"Japanese encephalitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Japanese encephalitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Japanese-encephalitis Clinical trials Japanese encephalitis Japanese-encephalitis Causes Japanese-encephalitis Prevention Introduction  Japanese encephalitis is a type of viral brain infection that's spread through mosquito bites. It's most common in rural areas throughout South East Asia, the Pacific islands and the Far East, but is very rare in travellers. The virus is found in pigs and birds, and is passed to mosquitoes when they bite infected animals. It's more common in rural areas where there are pig farms and rice fields. It can't be spread from person to person. There's currently no cure for Japanese encephalitis. Treatment involves supporting the functions of the body as it tries to fight off the infection. This usually requires the person being admitted to hospital, so they can be given fluids, oxygen and medication to treat any symptoms. Symptoms Most people infected by the Japanese encephalitis virus have either no symptoms, or mild, short-lived symptoms, which are often mistaken for flu. However, around 1 in every 250 people who become infected with Japanese encephalitis develop more severe symptoms, as the infection spreads to the brain. This usually happens 5-15 days after infection and symptoms can include: high temperature (fever) seizures (fits) stiff neck confusion inability to speak uncontrollable shaking of body parts (tremor) muscle weakness or paralysis Up to one in every three people who develop these more serious symptoms will die as a result of the infection. In those who survive, these symptoms tend to slowly improve. However, it can take several months to make a full recovery and up to half of those who do survive are left with permanent brain damage. This can lead to long-term problems such as tremors and muscle twitches, personality changes, muscle weakness, learning difficulties and paralysis in one or more limbs. When to seek medical advice You should seek immediate medical advice if you have any of the symptoms of Japanese encephalitis and have recently visited, or are still in, an area where the infection is found. GOV.UK has information about who to contact when you need immediate medical help abroad. If you're already back in the UK, see your GP. Your GP or the healthcare professional treating you will ask about your symptoms, where you've been travelling, what you did on your trip and what vaccinations you've had. If necessary, they may carry out a blood test to see if you have an infection. How common is Japanese encephalitis? It's very rare for travellers visiting risk areas to be affected by Japanese encephalitis. It's estimated that less than one in a million travellers develop Japanese encephalitis in any given year. There hasn't been a reported case in a traveller returning to the UK for more than 10 years. The people most at risk are those who live and work in rural areas where the condition is widespread. Around 75% of cases involve children under the age of 15. Find out more about the causes of Japanese encephalitis and the countries and activities which have a higher risk of catching the disease. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates there are around 68,000 cases of Japanese encephalitis worldwide each year. Preventing Japanese encephalitis The best way to prevent Japanese encephalitis is to be vaccinated against the infection before you visit a part of the world where there's a risk of catching it. The risk is greater if you're planning to visit rural areas or go hiking or camping. The vaccine, which is usually only available privately, gives protection against Japanese encephalitis in more than 9 out of 10 people who receive it. Even if you've been vaccinated, you should still take precautions to reduce your risk of being bitten by an infected mosquito, such as: sleeping in rooms with close-fitting gauze over the windows and doors \u2013 if you're sleeping outside, use mosquito nets that have been impregnated with an insecticide covering up with long-sleeved tops, trousers and socks applying a good-quality insect repellent to exposed areas of skin Read more about preventing Japanese encephalitis. Accessing healthcare abroad It's a good idea to keep a list of important telephone numbers with you when travelling abroad. These should include numbers for: local emergency services a representative of the travel company you booked your visit with your travel insurer the British consulate or embassy in the area you are visiting \u2013 GOV.UK has a directory of British consulates and embassies Read more about accessing healthcare abroad. Page last reviewed: 25\/02\/2016 Next review due: 25\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 101 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Encephalitis Travel vaccinations Travel health advice Healthcare abroad External links GOV.UK: foreign travel advice Fit for Travel NaTHNaC NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Jaundice","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Jaundice","content":"Jaundice - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Jaundice  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Jaundice Clinical trials Jaundice Community Jaundice Jaundice Causes Jaundice Diagnosis Jaundice Treatment Introduction  Jaundice is a term used to describe the yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes. It's caused by a build-up of a substance called bilirubin in the blood and body's tissues. Signs of jaundice The most common signs of jaundice are: yellowing of the skin, eyes and the lining of the inside of parts of the body, such as the mouth and nose (mucus membrane) pale-coloured stools dark-coloured urine When to seek medical advice Always seek immediate medical advice if you develop the above signs of jaundice. They're a warning sign that something is wrong with the normal processes of your body. Speak to your GP as soon as possible. If this isn't possible, telephone NHS 111 or contact your local out-of-hours service. Types of jaundice There are three types of jaundice depending on what's disrupting the normal removal of bilirubin from the body. They are: pre-hepatic jaundice \u2013 the disruption happens before bilirubin has been transported from the blood to the liver; it's caused by conditions such as sickle cell anaemia and haemolytic anaemia intra-hepatic jaundice (also known as hepatocellular jaundice) \u2013 the disruption happens inside the liver; it's caused by conditions such as Gilbert's syndrome, cirrhosis or other liver damage post-hepatic jaundice (also known as obstructive jaundice) \u2013 the disruption prevents the bile (and the bilirubin inside it) from draining out of the gallbladder and into the digestive system; it's caused by conditions such as gallstones or tumours Read more about the causes of jaundice. Who's at risk Intra-hepatic and post-hepatic jaundice are more common in middle-aged and elderly people than in the young. Pre-hepatic jaundice can affect people of all ages, including children. Certain lifestyle changes may help prevent jaundice. For example, maintaining a healthy weight, not drinking too much alcohol, and minimising your risk of hepatitis, will all help. Diagnosing jaundice If you have jaundice, you'll have a number of tests to find out how severe it is and determine the underlying cause. You'll probably have a urine test and liver function and blood tests. If intra-hepatic jaundice or post-hepatic jaundice is suspected, it's often possible to confirm the diagnosis using imaging tests to check for abnormalities inside the liver or bile duct systems. Read more about diagnosing jaundice. Treating jaundice Treatment for jaundice in adults and older children depends on what's causing it. This may involve treating the underlying condition, a blood transfusion or surgery. Read more about treating jaundice. Preventing jaundice It's not possible to prevent all cases of jaundice because it can be caused by a wide range of conditions or circumstances. However, you can take precautions to minimise your risk of developing jaundice. These include: ensuring you don't exceed the recommended daily amount (RDA) for alcohol consumption maintaining a healthy weight for your height and build if appropriate, ensuring you're vaccinated against hepatitis A or hepatitis B if you're travelling to high-risk areas of the world minimising your risk of exposure to hepatitis C because there's currently no vaccine for the condition; In England, the most effective way of preventing hepatitis C is by not injecting illegal drugs, such as heroin, or making sure that you don't share drug injecting equipment if you do Newborn jaundice Newborn babies are often born with jaundice. At a very young age, the various systems the body uses to remove bilirubin from the body aren't fully developed. Newborn jaundice isn't usually a cause for concern and often resolves within two weeks without treatment. Read more about newborn jaundice. Page last reviewed: 09\/02\/2015 Next review due: 09\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 255 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol Alcoholic liver disease Cirrhosis Exercise Healthy eating Hepatitis Newborn jaundice External links British Liver Trust: looking after your liver CLDF: living with liver disease Lab Tests Online UK: bilirubin test 'I got cirrhosis at 34' After years of drinking too much, Andy Ball was diagnosed with the liver disease cirrhosis Newborn jaundice Find out about newborn jaundice, a common and usually harmless condition in newborn babies that causes yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Jaundice in newborns","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Jaundice-newborn","content":"Newborn jaundice - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Newborn jaundice  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Jaundice-newborn Clinical trials Newborn jaundice Jaundice-newborn Symptoms Jaundice-newborn Causes Jaundice-newborn Diagnosis Jaundice-newborn Treatment Jaundice-newborn Kernicterus Introduction  Jaundice is a common and usually harmless condition in newborn babies that causes yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes. The medical term for jaundice in babies is neonatal jaundice. Other symptoms of newborn jaundice can include: yellowing of the palms of the hands or soles of the feet dark, yellow urine \u2013 a newborn baby's urine should be colourless pale-coloured poo \u2013 it should be yellow or orange The symptoms of newborn jaundice usually develop two to three days after the birth and tend to get better without treatment by the time the baby is about two weeks old. Read more about the symptoms of jaundice in babies. When to seek medical advice Your baby will be examined for signs of jaundice within 72 hours of being born, during the newborn physical examination. If your baby develops signs of jaundice after this time, speak to your midwife, health visitor or GP as soon as possible for advice. While jaundice isn't usually a cause for concern, it's important to determine whether your baby needs treatment. If your baby is being monitored for jaundice at home, it's also important to contact your midwife urgently if their symptoms quickly get worse or  they become very reluctant to feed. Read more about diagnosing jaundice in babies. Why does my baby have jaundice? Jaundice is caused by the build-up of bilirubin in the blood. Bilirubin is a yellow substance produced when red blood cells are broken down. Jaundice is common in newborn babies because babies have a high level of red blood cells in their blood, which are broken down and replaced frequently. The liver in newborn babies is also not fully developed, so it's less effective at removing the bilirubin from the blood. By the time a baby is about two weeks old, their liver is more effective at processing bilirubin, so jaundice often corrects itself by this age without causing any harm. In a small number of cases, jaundice can be the sign of an underlying health condition. This is often the case if jaundice develops shortly after birth (within the first 24 hours). Read more about the causes of jaundice in babies. How common is it? Jaundice is one of the most common conditions that can affect newborn babies. It's estimated 6 out of every 10 babies develop jaundice, including 8 out of 10 babies born prematurely (babies born before the 37th week of pregnancy). However, only around 1 in 20 babies has a blood bilirubin level high enough to need treatment. For reasons that are unclear, breastfeeding a baby increases the risk of them developing jaundice, which can often persist for a month or longer. In most cases, the benefits of breastfeeding far outweigh any risks associated with jaundice. Treating newborn jaundice Most cases of jaundice in babies don't need treatment as the symptoms normally pass within 10 to 14 days, although symptoms can last longer in a minority of cases. Treatment is usually only recommended if tests show a baby has very high levels of bilirubin in their blood because there's a small risk the bilirubin could pass into the brain and cause brain damage. There are two main treatments that can be carried out in hospital to quickly reduce your baby's bilirubin levels. These are: phototherapy \u2013 a special type of light shines on the skin, which alters the bilirubin into a form that can be more easily broken down by the liver an exchange transfusion \u2013 a type of blood transfusion where small amounts of your baby's blood are removed and replaced with blood from a matching donor Most babies respond well to treatment and can leave hospital after a few days. Read more about treating jaundice in babies. Complications If a baby with very high levels of bilirubin isn't treated, there's a risk they could develop permanent brain damage. This is known as kernicterus. Kernicterus is very rare in the UK, affecting less than 1 in every 100,000 babies born. There were eight hospital admissions for kernicterus in England in 2013-14. Read more about kernicterus in babies. Page last reviewed: 13\/10\/2015 Next review due: 13\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 466 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 275  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 129  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Jaundice Pregnancy and baby guide External links Children's Liver Disease Foundation (CLDF) National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): neonatal jaundice Baby special care Find out about special care for babies born early, sick, jaundiced or with a disability Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Does your child have a serious illness? Learn the warning signs that your baby or toddler may be seriously ill NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Jaw problems","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/temporomandibular-joint-disorder","content":"Temporomandibular disorder (TMD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Temporomandibular disorder (TMD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Temporomandibular disorder (TMD) Introduction  Temporomandibular disorder (TMD) is a problem affecting the 'chewing' muscles and the joints between the lower jaw and the base of the skull. Doctors sometimes refer to the condition as \"myofascial pain disorder\". It's been estimated that up to 30% of adults will experience TMD at some point in their lives. The condition itself isn't usually serious, and the symptoms it can cause \u2013 including pain, jaw joint clicking or popping, and difficulties eating \u2013 usually only last a few months before getting better. However, these symptoms can significantly lower quality of life, and specialist treatment might be required if they're severe. What are the symptoms? TMD can cause: clicking, popping or grating noises as you chew or move your mouth muscle pain around the jaw pain in front of the ear that may spread to the cheek, ear and temple difficulty opening the mouth \u2013 the jaw may feel tight, as if it is stuck, making eating difficult headache or migraine earache or a \"buzzing\" or blocked sensation in the ear pain in other areas of the body \u2013 such as neckache or backache These symptoms may lead to related symptoms, such as disturbed sleep. What are the causes? Possible causes of TMD include: clenching your jaw or grinding your teeth during sleep (bruxism) \u2013 which overworks the jaw muscles and puts pressure on the joint (often caused by stress) wear and tear of the inside of the jaw joint \u2013 usually caused by osteoarthritis injury to the jaw joint \u2013 for example, after a blow to the face or surgery stress \u2013 some people may inherit increased sensitivity to pain or stress uneven bite \u2013 for example, when new fillings, dental crowns or dentures are fitted specific diseases \u2013 TMD may be associated with specific diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, gout or fibromyalgia However, some people may develop TMD without an obvious cause being found. How is TMD treated? If you have TMD, see your GP or dentist first for diagnosis and to discuss treatment options. Generally, non-surgical treatments such as lifestyle changes and self-help physiotherapy-type treatments are tried first. A small number of people with severe TMD may be referred to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon to discuss further treatment options. Lifestyle changes There are a number of self-help measures that can help improve TMD, including: resting the joint by eating soft food and avoiding chewing gum holding a warm or cold flannel to the jaw for 10-20 minutes, several times a day doing a few gentle jaw-stretching exercises \u2013 your healthcare professional can recommend appropriate exercises avoiding opening the joint too wide until the pain settles avoiding clenching the teeth for long periods of time massaging the muscles around the joint relaxation techniques to relieve stress not resting your chin on your hand Mouth guards Mouth guards (plastic devices that fit over your teeth) may be helpful if you grind your teeth. These cover the teeth at night to reduce jaw clenching and teeth grinding, and can be made to measure by your dentist. Read more about treatments for teeth grinding. Medication Painkillers such as paracetamol, ibuprofen or codeine can help relieve the pain associated with TMD. If these aren't enough to control the pain, your doctor may prescribe stronger medication such as a muscle relaxant or antidepressant. Steroid injections If TMD is caused by a disease such as arthritis, a steroid injection into the jaw joint can help reduce pain and swelling in a joint or the surrounding soft tissue. Most people report feeling less pain within the first 24 hours to one week. You may find your pain improves for a period of a few weeks to several months and, in some cases, the injection resolves the pain completely. Read more about corticosteroids (steroids). Surgery If the above measures don't help and the source of your symptoms is the temporomandibular joint \u2013 rather than the chewing muscles \u2013 your specialist may suggest a surgical treatment such as arthrocentesis (joint wash-out). Open joint surgery may be considered in the rare cases where there is an abnormality within the joint. Total joint replacement may be recommended for an extremely small number of people with severe, long-lasting symptoms and impaired jaw function. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has produced guidelines on this procedure. Read the NICE 2009 guidelines on artificial total temporomandibular joint replacement. All joint surgery can have significant side effects and you should discuss these with your surgeon. Outlook Most cases of TMD improve over time and do not get worse, and most people will not need surgery. In the meantime, symptoms can often be improved with the treatments mentioned above. Although not a serious condition, temporomandibular disorder can make a significant impact on quality of life  Community content from HealthUnlocked Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice Page last reviewed: 21\/08\/2014 Next review due: 21\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1126 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 584  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 303  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Find an NHS dentist Osteoarthritis Rheumatoid arthritis Teeth grinding Tension-type headaches External links The British Dental Health Foundation The British Pain Society The Migraine Trust: jaw tension factsheet NICE 2009 guidelines: TM joint replacement British Orthodontic Society: your jaw surgery Pain Concern Breathing exercise for stress This calming breathing technique for stress, anxiety and panic takes just a few minutes and can be done anywhere 10 stress busters Stress-beating tips that really help, including being more active and taking time out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Jellyfish stings and other sea creature stings","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Stings-marine-creatures","content":"Jellyfish stings and other sea creature stings - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Jellyfish and other sea creature stings  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Stings-marine-creatures Clinical trials Jellyfish stings Stings-marine-creatures Symptoms Stings-marine-creatures Treatment Stings-marine-creatures Prevention Introduction  A sea creature sting can usually be treated with first aid. But if serious symptoms develop, such as severe pain, swelling or difficulty breathing, dial 999 for an ambulance. Fortunately, there are only a few stinging sea creatures in the seas around the UK. These are: weever fish stingrays sea urchins jellyfish Portuguese man-of-war These are described below. Weever fish Weever fish are small, sandy-coloured fish that usually lie buried in the sand on the seabed. They have poisonous spines on their back and gills that can sting you, usually on your feet or hands. Stingrays Stingrays are flat, circular or diamond-shaped fish that have a sharp, serrated barb underneath their tail. As with weever fish, most people stung by a stingray are stung on their lower legs, ankles and feet after accidentally stepping on one in shallow water. Sea urchins Sea urchins are small, round sea creatures with a bony shell covered in spines. They're usually found in the shallows, on rocks and in seaweed. Sea urchin spines are hard, sharp and can cause puncture wounds. Between the spines are small organs, containing a poison that's released as a defence mechanism. Jellyfish Jellyfish are mushroom-shaped creatures that often float near the surface and have long, thin tentacles on the underside of their bodies. The tentacles are covered with small poisonous sacs called nematocysts which, if touched, produce a nasty sting. During the warmer months in recent years, large groups of jellyfish have become increasingly common in the seas around Europe. Portuguese man-of-war A Portuguese man-of-war is a large, poisonous jellyfish-like creature (although it's not a jellyfish) with a large purple-blue, gas-filled bladder and tentacles that hang below the water. They're usually found in tropical waters, but some have been spotted in UK waters or found washed up on beaches. The sting can be painful, but rarely causes death. Signs and symptoms All stings are painful and cause swelling, inflammation or raised areas of skin (welts) and nausea. You may also have other symptoms, depending on what has stung you. Weever fish and sea urchins usually sting your foot and often leave spines in the wound. Stingrays can leave a large, jagged cut or puncture wound on your skin. Jellyfish and Portuguese men-of-war often leave raised blisters on the skin in the shape of their own tentacles. Read more about the symptoms of sea creature stings. When to seek medical help Seek medical assistance if you've been stung while in the sea and your symptoms are severe \u2013 for example: severe, prolonged pain chest pain or breathing problems severe redness and swelling around the affected area fits or seizures You should also seek medical help if you know you've been stung by a stingray, or if you've been stung on a particularly sensitive part of your body, such as your face or genitals. Less severe marine creature stings can be treated yourself using first aid techniques. Read more about how marine creature stings are treated, both at home and in hospital. Avoiding stings in the sea It's rare to be stung in the seas around the UK, but there are precautions you can take to avoid being stung, including: observing beach warning signs  not touching or handling sea creatures that sting wearing protective clothing, such as a wetsuit or waterproof footwear scuffing your feet as you walk in shallow water to warn any sea creatures that you're approaching Read more about how to prevent being stung in the sea. Healthcare abroad If you're planning a trip abroad, it's a good idea to familiarise yourself with any potentially harmful plants and animals in the countries you'll be visiting. It's also important to have the right travel insurance for the country or countries you visit. Make sure your insurance policy covers specific activities you plan to do, such as water sports or scuba diving. When travelling in Europe, a valid European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) entitles you to free or reduced-cost medical care. However, the EHIC isn't a substitute for travel insurance and doesn't provide the same level of cover \u2013 for example, an EHIC doesn't cover emergency travel back to the UK. Page last reviewed: 05\/05\/2015 Next review due: 05\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 47 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaphylaxis Antihistamines Beach safety First aid Insect bites and stings Travel health External links BBC Nature: jellyfish BBC Nature: sea urchins BBC Nature: stingrays WHO: guidelines for safe recreational water environments Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/long-qt-syndrome","content":"Long QT syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Long QT syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Long QT syndrome Introduction  Long QT syndrome causes problems with the electrical activity of the heart. It's uncommon, occurring in around 1 in every 2,000 people. Long QT syndrome is often the result of a faulty gene that's inherited from one of your parents. The abnormal gene causes an imbalance in the chemicals that create the electric impulses in your heart. The syndrome can also be caused by medicines for other conditions. Symptoms of long QT syndrome There are usually no physical signs of long QT syndrome, and some people don't experience any symptoms. The most common symptoms are blackouts or seizures caused by the interruptions to the heart's rhythm. Some people with long QT syndrome find that their heart sometimes suddenly beats in an abnormally fast, uncontrollable way. This type of arrhythmia is called \"torsade de pointes\". When this happens, the heart can't pump blood properly and the brain is temporarily starved of oxygen, causing the person to temporarily pass out. The heart's rhythm usually returns to normal within a minute or so and the person regains consciousness. These episodes can start at any age and may be triggered by: stress a sudden noise \u2013 such as an alarm bell strenuous exercise \u2013 particularly swimming a slow heart rate during sleep However, there isn't always a trigger. Sometimes, the abnormal heart rhythm persists, leading to ventricular fibrillation (a rapid, uncoordinated series of contractions). This rarely reverts to normal without medication and, if it isn't electrically corrected, usually causes the heart to stop pumping (cardiac arrest) and death. Dial 999 to request an ambulance if someone with long QT syndrome suddenly collapses. Perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) until medical help arrives. Long QT syndrome is a leading cause of sudden cardiac death in young, otherwise healthy people, and is often thought to be an underlying cause of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). What causes long QT syndrome? To understand the underlying cause of long QT syndrome, it's important to know how the heart cells work. On the surface of each heart muscle cell are tiny pores, or ion channels. These open and close to let electrically charged sodium, calcium and potassium atoms (ions) flow into and out of the cells. This passage of ions generates the heart's electrical activity. The electrical signal spreads from the top of the heart to the bottom, causing the heart to contract and pump blood. In most cases of long QT syndrome, the flow of potassium ions out of the heart muscle's cells is delayed. This means that after each heartbeat, your heart can take longer to reset itself. Inherited long QT syndrome Long QT syndrome is often inherited from a parent as a faulty gene. The abnormal gene affects the proteins that make up the ion channels in the heart cells. The ion channels may not work well, or there may not be enough of them, which disrupts the heart's electrical activity. Drug-induced long QT syndrome Certain commonly used medicines can also trigger long QT syndrome, including some types of: antibiotics antihistamines antidepressants antipsychotics diuretics heart medications Cardiac Risk in the Young has published a list of medications which people with long QT syndrome should avoid. Drug-induced long QT syndrome usually happens in people with an inherited higher risk of developing it, such as those with slight genetic heart defects. For more information, you can read the Sudden Arrhythmic Death Sydrome's (SADS UK) guide about acquired, drug-induced long QT syndrome (PDF, 158kb). What does 'long QT' mean? Every time your heart beats, it produces tiny electrical signals. An electrocardiogram (ECG) machine traces these signals on paper \u2013 a typical pattern is shown below. As the graph shows, each heartbeat is mapped as five distinct electrical waves \u2013 P, Q, R, S and T. The part of the pattern from Q to T represents the electrical activity of the heart's lower chambers, or ventricles. In people with long QT syndrome, this QT interval lasts abnormally long. In other words, it takes longer for the heart cells in the ventricles to recharge after each heartbeat. This can upset the timing of the heartbeat and may trigger an abnormally fast heart rhythm. Diagnosing long QT syndrome  If your GP thinks you have long QT syndrome after assessing your symptoms, they may recommend that you have an ECG and refer you to a heart specialist (cardiologist). In particular, if blackouts have occurred during exercise, or if there's a family history of sudden cardiac death below the age of 40, specialist assessment is needed. An ECG is a test that records your heart's rhythm and electrical activity. If you have long QT syndrome, the trace of the QT section will be longer than normal. During an ECG, sticky pads called electrodes are stuck on your arms, legs and chest, and connected by wires to an ECG machine. The test may need to be carried out while you exercise on a treadmill, as well as during rest. Genetic testing may be needed to identify the defective gene that may be causing long QT syndrome. It can also help to determine which family members may have inherited the defective gene and need clinical assessment. Treating long QT syndrome  Most people with inherited long QT syndrome will need treatment with medicines. Beta-blockers, such as propranolol or nadolol, may be prescribed to help control irregular heartbeats and slow down your heart rate. If your symptoms are frequent or severe, and you have a high risk of having a life-threatening arrhythmia, you may need to have a pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) fitted. Like pacemakers, ICDs are small battery-powered devices. If the ICD senses that the heart is beating at a potentially dangerous abnormal rate, it will deliver an electric shock that returns the heart rhythm to normal. In some cases of long QT syndrome, surgery may be needed to control the flow of chemicals into the heart. If you have long QT syndrome caused by taking medication, your medication will be reviewed. It may be possible to prescribe alternative medication that doesn't adversely affect your QT interval. Living with long QT syndrome With appropriate treatment, such as medication or surgery, it should be possible to lead a relatively normal lifestyle. However, you may need to make some lifestyle adjustments to reduce your risk of having blackouts. For example, your doctor may advise you not to exercise strenuously or play contact sports, and to try to avoid startling noises, such as alarm clocks or telephones with loud ringtones. Avoiding stressful situations may also be recommended. Your doctor may prescribe potassium supplements or suggest that you increase the amount of potassium-rich foods in your diet. Good sources of potassium include: fruit \u2013 such as bananas vegetables pulses nuts and seeds milk fish shellfish beef chicken turkey bread Always tell medical staff that you have long QT syndrome. Any new medication, both prescription or over-the-counter, will need to be carefully checked to see if it's suitable for you. Information about you If you have long QT syndrome, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register.   How the heart works The heart has two upper chambers (the left and right atria) and two lower chambers (the left and right ventricles). The atria and ventricles have walls of muscle. A heartbeat happens when the muscle suddenly contracts (tightens) so that the chambers become smaller and the blood inside is squeezed out. The control of the heartbeat starts with a small clump of cells in the right atrium, called the sinoatrial node (the heart's natural pacemaker). This sends out electrical impulses through the atrial muscle to another clump of cells called the atrioventricular (AV) node, located between the atria and ventricles. The impulse then continues through the AV node and down the fibres that conduct the electrical impulse into the muscle of the ventricles. The AV node determines the rate of contraction of the ventricles. The pulse you can feel when you hold your wrist is due to the contraction of the ventricles. Page last reviewed: 12\/02\/2015 Next review due: 12\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 171 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Beta-blockers Fainting Pacemaker implantation Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) External links Arrhythmia Alliance: what is an arrhythmia? SADS UK: long QT syndrome Electrocardiogram (ECG) An ECG is a simple test to check your heart's rhythm and electrical activity Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Jet lag","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Jet-lag","content":"Jet lag - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Jet lag  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Jet-lag Clinical trials Jet lag Jet-lag Symptoms Jet-lag Causes Jet-lag Treatment Jet-lag Prevention Introduction  Jet lag refers to a range of symptoms experienced while adapting to a different light-dark schedule following a flight to a new time zone. It can affect people of all ages and is the result of your internal body clock not being able to adjust immediately to a new time zone. Jet lag can disturb your sleep at night and make you feel drowsy and lethargic (lacking in energy) during the day. It can also sometimes cause digestion problems. Crossing seven to 12 time zones usually results in more severe jet lag than crossing three to six time zones. Crossing one or two time zones doesn't usually cause any problems. People usually report more severe jet lag for easterly flights compared with westerly flights across the same number of time zones.  Jet lag isn't the same as general travel fatigue and can't be cured by certain types of aircraft, a more comfortable seat, \u201Cspeedy-boarding\u201D or the class of travel. Read more about the symptoms of jet lag. What causes jet lag? The world is divided into 24 different time zones. Your body's natural 24-hour clocks control 24-hour circadian rhythms, which are disrupted after crossing time zones. Your body clocks influence your sleeping and waking pattern, as well as circadian rhythms in: appetite digestion bowel habits urine production body temperature blood pressure Your body clocks are set to your local time by light and social interaction, so that you're prepared for becoming active in the morning and for going to sleep at night. If you travel across time zones, it can take a while for your body clocks to adjust to a new light-dark schedule and daily routine at your destination. Read more about the causes of jet lag. Treating jet lag Jet lag can be a problem if, like pilots and cabin crew, you fly frequently across three or more time zones. However, there's little evidence to suggest that long-term human health is affected by jet lag. For example, the risk of most cancers is lower in commercial airline crew. In most cases, jet lag symptoms pass after a few days without the need for treatment. Not many proposed treatments have been tested properly in clinical trials. The advice below is a \"common-sense\" approach that might help reduce the effects of jet lag. When you arrive at your destination: establish a new routine - eat and sleep at the correct times for your new time zone, not at the time you usually eat and sleep at home avoid napping as soon as you arrive - even if you're tired after a long flight, staying active until the correct time to sleep at your destination will help your body adjust quicker spend time outdoors - natural daylight will help your body adjust to a new routine following most flights Read more about treating jet lag. Preventing jet lag It's not possible to prevent jet lag, and evidence about various treatments isn't very robust. However, there are some things that might be useful to help reduce its effects, such as changing your sleep routine a few days before departure and making sure you get enough sleep before you travel. Read more about preventing jet lag.  Page last reviewed: 24\/11\/2014 Next review due: 24\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 216 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Healthcare abroad Insomnia Travel health Travel insurance Travel sickness Travel vaccinations External links Fit For Travel: advice for travellers GOV.UK: foreign travel advice MDtravelhealth.com: illness prevention Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Travel health","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/TravelHealth\/Pages\/Travelhealthhome.aspx","content":"Travel health - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Travel health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Travel health Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Sunscreen and sun safety Advice for adults and children on sunscreen and sun safety in the UK and abroad. Family alerts travellers to deadly fake alcohol The family of a backpacker who died from methanol poisoning are warning travellers of the dangers of fake alcohol. 'Malaria nearly killed me' Mo mistakenly thought he was immune to malaria when he visited family in Sierra Leone. Before you travel Practical advice if you're travelling abroad, including vaccinations, DVT, travel insurance and sun safety. Travel health checklist Expert advice on what to pack to stay safe and healthy abroad, including first aid essentials. Travelling in pregnancy How to travel safely and comfortably, and when you might need a doctor's note. Safer sex on holiday Protect yourself from a sexually transmitted infection or unplanned pregnancy on holiday. Food and water abroad Find out how to protect yourself against illnesses from contaminated food and water. Prevent DVT when you travel Reduce your risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) during a long-haul flight. 'I got DVT from flying' Mark Pownall developed deep vein thrombosis (DVT) on a long-haul flight from New Orleans to London. Travelling with asthma Tips for travelling with asthma, including taking medication, vaccinations, air travel and insurance. Travelling with diabetes Travelling with diabetes, including diet, taking medicines, vaccines, insurance and air travel. Travelling with a heart condition Travelling with a heart condition, including vaccinations, travel insurance, air travel, pacemakers and ICDs. Apply for a free EHIC card If you're travelling to an EEA country, you need to tak a free EHIC card. Here's how to get one. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the mole information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/mole_a_visual_guide.html Ebola virus disease Ebola virus disease is a serious, usually fatal, disease for which there are no licensed vaccines or treatments Zika virus Zika virus disease is mainly spread by mosquitoes. For most people it is a very mild infection and isn't harmful. It may be more serious for pregnant women, as it's been linked to birth defects \u2013 specifically, abnormally small heads Travel health advice by country Travel in pregnancy How to travel safely and comfortably, and when you might need a doctor's note Video: European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) Get ready for your holiday and make sure you're covered for all eventualities. Is your EHIC still valid? Don\u2019t forget your passport You can renew your passport up to nine months before it expires \u2013 check now Healthy holidays How to keep your family healthy during the summer holidays. Includes beach safety, camping safety and free activities Travel health videos Watch our travel health videos and get ready for your next holiday, including tips on beach safety and how to apply sunscreen. Travel health Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A simple guide to health precautions when travelling abroad, including vaccinations, taking condoms and a first aid kit, and being careful about drinking water. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against Video: beach safety A holiday at the seaside is fun for the whole family. An RNLI lifeguard explains how to stay safe on the beach. Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer Treatment abroad Thinking of going abroad for dental or medical treatment? Find out about the risks and make an informed decision NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Joint hypermobility","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Joint-hypermobility","content":"Joint hypermobility - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Joint hypermobility  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Joint-hypermobility Clinical trials Joint hypermobility Joint-hypermobility Symptoms Joint-hypermobility Causes Joint-hypermobility Diagnosis Joint-hypermobility Treatment Introduction  Joint hypermobility means that some or all of a person's joints have an unusually large range of movement. People with hypermobility are particularly supple and able to move their limbs into positions others find impossible. Joint hypermobility is what some people refer to as having \"loose joints\" or being \"double-jointed\". Joint hypermobility syndrome Many people with hypermobile joints don't have any problems, and some people \u2013 such as ballet dancers, gymnasts and musicians \u2013 may actually benefit from the increased flexibility. However, some people with joint hypermobility can have a number of unpleasant symptoms as well, such as: pain and stiffness in the joints and muscles clicking joints joints that dislocate (come out of the correct position) easily fatigue (extreme tiredness) recurrent injuries \u2013 such as sprains digestive problems \u2013 such as constipation and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) dizziness and fainting thin or stretchy skin If hypermobility occurs alongside symptoms such as these, it is known as joint hypermobility syndrome (JHS). Read more about the symptoms of joint hypermobility and diagnosing joint hypermobility. What causes joint hypermobility? Joint hypermobility is often hereditary (runs in families). One of the main causes is thought to be genetically determined changes to a type of protein called collagen. Collagen is found throughout the body \u2013 for example, in skin and ligaments (the tough bands of connective tissue that link two bones together at a joint). If collagen is weaker than it should be, tissues in the body will be fragile, which can make ligaments and joints loose and stretchy. As a result, the joints can extend further than usual. JHS is widely thought to be a feature of an underlying condition affecting connective tissue called Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS). Read more about the causes of joint hypermobility. Living with joint hypermobility Most people with hypermobile joints won't experience any problems and won't require any medical treatment or support. However, JHS can be very difficult to live with because it can cause such a wide range of symptoms. People with JHS often benefit from a combination of controlled exercise and physiotherapy, as well as additional help to manage pain and make everyday tasks easier. The nature of JHS means that you are at increased risk of injuries, such as dislocations and sprains. Managing the condition may therefore also involve treating short-term injuries as they arise, while following a long-term treatment plan to manage daily symptoms. Read more about treating joint hypermobility. Who is affected Joint hypermobility is thought to be very common, particularly in children and young people. Some estimates suggest that around one in every five people in the UK may have hypermobile joints. In many cases, the joints become stiffer with age, although joint hypermobility and its associated symptoms can continue into adult life. It's not known how many people have JHS in the UK, as the condition is often not recognised or is misdiagnosed. It's thought to be more common in females than males, and less common in white people than those of other ethnic backgrounds. People with joint hypermobility have an unusually large range of movement in some or all of their joints  Community content from HealthUnlocked Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Find out about EDS - a group of conditions that cause flexible joints, stretchy skin and skin that bruises easily Page last reviewed: 18\/09\/2014 Next review due: 18\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 444 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 146  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Joint pain Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Marfan syndrome Physiotherapy Occupational therapy External links Brittle Bone Society: about osteogenesis imperfecta Ehlers-Danlos Support UK Marfan Foundation: what is Marfan syndrome? Hypermobility Syndromes Association Physiotherapy Find out how physiotherapy can help promote healing and wellbeing Occupational therapy Occupational therapy provides practical support to people whose health stops them doing the things that matter to them Find and choose services for Joint hypermobility Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Joint pain","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/joint-pain","content":"Joint pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Joint pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Joint pain is a very common problem with many possible causes - but it's usually a result of injury or arthritis. In older people, joint pain that gets steadily worse is usually a sign of osteoarthritis. It may affect just one joint, or many. See your GP if you have persistent symptoms of osteoarthritis. The information and advice on this page shouldn't be used to self-diagnose your condition, but may give you a better idea of what's causing your pain. It covers other possible causes of: pain in just one joint pain in many joints Pain in just one joint Knee pain The knee joint is probably the most frequently damaged joint and is particularly vulnerable as it takes the full weight of your body. However, knee pain isn't always a joint problem. Learn about the most common causes of knee pain and what you should do. The most common and more unusual causes of pain in a single joint are described below. Inflammation of the joint lining If you've injured the joint recently and it suddenly becomes painful again, the thin layer of tissue lining the joints and tendons may be inflamed \u2013 a condition called traumatic synovitis. It usually doesn't cause any redness or heat. You should be able to manage injury-related swelling at home with anti-inflammatories, an icepack and rest. Gout or pseudogout If the skin over the joint is hot and red, and the pain comes in repeated attacks, the cause is likely to be either gout or pseudogout. Both conditions are types of arthritis. Gout usually affects the joint of the big toe first, before affecting other joints. It's important to correctly diagnose gout, as treatment will prevent future attacks of joint pain and disability. Pseudogout is a similar condition to gout, but usually affects the knee joint first. See your GP if you think you have either condition. Damage to the cartilage at the back of the kneecap Knee pain that feels worse when going up or down stairs could be a sign of a damaged kneecap \u2013 a condition called chondromalacia patellae. This shouldn't cause any redness or heat around the knee. The cause isn't really understood, but it can be linked to overuse of the knee. You can treat this problem yourself with anti-inflammatories, an icepack and rest. Bleeding into the joint space If you've recently had an injury to the knee joint, such as a torn ligament or knee fracture, it may cause bleeding into the joint spaces. This is known as haemarthrosis. This is more likely to happen to people on anticoagulants, such as warfarin. Signs of haemarthrosis are: swelling of the knee warmth stiffness and bruising, which occur soon after the injury You should go to hospital immediately for treatment if you have a very swollen knee. Less common causes Sudden pain in a joint is less commonly caused by: a fracture \u2013 read about a broken arm or wrist, broken leg, broken ankle or hip fracture reactive arthritis \u2013 which usually develops after an infection and tends to affect young adults psoriatic arthritis \u2013 a type of arthritis that affects up to one in five people with psoriasis  rheumatoid arthritis \u2013 which can start in just one joint, with the pain coming and going  Osgood-Schlatter's disease \u2013 swelling and tenderness over the bony bump just below the kneecap Rarely, the cause may be: septic arthritis \u2013 a serious condition that causes a painful, hot, swollen joint that you won't be able to move (sometimes with fever) \u2013 see your GP urgently or go to A&E haemophilia \u2013 an inherited condition that affects the blood's ability to clot  a tropical infection cancer crumbling of the bone (avascular necrosis) \u2013 caused by a lack of blood supply repeated dislocation of the joint Pain in many joints Rheumatoid arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis is another type of arthritis that causes pain and swelling in the joints \u2013 usually the hands, feet and wrists. The pain may come and go in the early phases, with long periods between attacks. It can leave you feeling generally unwell and tired. Read more about the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. Psoriatic arthritis Psoriatic arthritis affects up to one in five people with psoriasis. This type of arthritis is unpredictable, but flare-ups can usually be managed with treatment.  Like other types of arthritis, it means that one or more of your joints are inflamed and become swollen, stiff, painful and difficult to move. A viral infection that causes arthritis Examples of viral infections which can cause pain in the joints and symptoms of a fever include: viral hepatitis \u2013 liver inflammation caused by a virus rubella \u2013 a viral infection that used to be common in children A disease of the connective tissue Widespread joint pain is sometimes a sign of a disease that affects almost all the organs of the body, such as: lupus \u2013 where the immune system mistakenly attacks healthy cells, tissue and organs scleroderma \u2013 where the immune system attacks connective tissue underneath the skin, causing hard, thickened areas of skin Less common causes Widespread joint pain can less commonly be caused by: a rarer type of arthritis \u2013 such as ankylosing spondylitis, juvenile arthritis or reactive arthritis Behçet\u2019s syndrome \u2013 a rare and poorly understood condition that causes inflammation of the blood vessels Henoch-Schönlein purpura \u2013 a rare condition, usually seen in children, that causes blood vessels to become inflamed cancer  some treatments \u2013 including steroid therapy, isoniazid and hydralazine hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy \u2013 a rare disorder that causes clubbing of the fingers, seen in people with lung cancer sarcoidosis \u2013 a rare condition that causes small patches of tissue to develop in the organs Page last reviewed: 10\/05\/2016 Next review due: 10\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 107 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Osteoarthritis Cartilage damage Knee pain Sports injuries Shoulder pain Living with pain External links Arthritis Care Pain Concern Community content from HealthUnlocked Arm or elbow pain Common causes, tips for managing the pain, and when you should see a doctor Life with osteoarthritis Kathleen Smith describes life with osteoarthritis and how swimming helps with the pain Hip pain in adults Most cases of hip pain are caused by osteoarthritis, the most common type of arthritis in the UK NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}