{"conditions":[{"name":"Yellow fever","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Yellow-fever","content":"Yellow fever - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Yellow fever  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Yellow-fever Clinical trials Yellow fever Yellow-fever Vaccination Introduction  Yellow fever is a serious viral infection that is spread by certain types of mosquito. It\u2019s mainly found in sub-Saharan Africa, South America and parts of the Caribbean. The condition can be prevented with a vaccination and is a very rare cause of illness in travellers. Six travellers from Europe and North America have died from yellow fever since 1996. None of them were vaccinated. If you're planning to visit places where yellow fever infection is found, you should seek travel health advice about the vaccination available. A map and list of countries where yellow fever is found is available on the NHS Fit for Travel website. How yellow fever is spread The virus that causes yellow fever is passed to humans through the bites of infected mosquitoes. The mosquitoes that spread the infection are usually active and bite during daylight hours, from dusk until dawn, and are found in both urban and rural areas. Yellow fever can\u2019t be passed directly from person to person through close contact. Yellow fever symptoms The symptoms of yellow fever occur in two stages. The initial symptoms develop three to six days after infection, and can include: a high temperature (fever) a headache nausea or vomiting muscle pain, including backache  loss of appetite This stage will usually pass after three to four days and most people will make a full recovery. However, around 15% of people go on to develop more serious problems, including jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes), kidney failure and bleeding from the mouth, nose, eyes or stomach (causing blood in your vomit and stools). Up to half of those who experience these symptoms will die. When to seek medical advice You should see a doctor as soon as possible if you develop symptoms of yellow fever and are currently travelling in an area where the virus is found, or have recently returned from one of these areas. To help determine whether you have yellow fever, the doctor will want to know exactly where you have been travelling and what symptoms you have. A blood test will be needed to confirm the diagnosis. Treating yellow fever There is no specific treatment for yellow fever, but the symptoms can be treated while your body fights off the virus. Headache, high temperature and muscle pain can be treated using painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. You should also drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration. If your symptoms are particularly severe, you may be admitted to hospital so that your condition can be monitored and you can receive supportive care. Yellow fever vaccination The vaccination against yellow fever should be given at least 10 days before travelling to an area where the infection is found, to allow your body to develop protection against the virus that causes the infection. Some countries require a proof of vaccination certificate before they will let you enter the country. This will only become valid 10 days after you are vaccinated. The yellow fever vaccination is given as a single injection and it offers protection to over 95% of those who have it. The protection offered by the vaccine may be life-long, but vaccination certificates are currently only valid for 10 years, and a booster dose may sometimes be needed after this time if you are planning another visit to an area where yellow fever is found. Even if you have been vaccinated, it\u2019s still a good idea to take steps to prevent mosquito bites while you\u2019re travelling \u2013 for example, by using mosquito nets, wearing loose, long-sleeved clothing, and applying insect repellent containing 50% DEET to exposed skin. Read more about the yellow fever vaccination. Information about you If you have yellow fever, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 16\/01\/2015 Next review due: 16\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 238 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 124  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Travel health Travel vaccinations Healthcare abroad External links Fit for Travel: yellow fever Fit for Travel: yellow fever risk areas HPS: yellow fever vaccination centres in Scotland NaTHNaC: find a yellow fever vaccination centre WHO: yellow fever NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}