{"conditions":[{"name":"Rabies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rabies","content":"Rabies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rabies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rabies Clinical trials Rabies Rabies Symptoms Rabies Post-exposure treatment Rabies Vaccination Introduction  Rabies is a very serious viral infection that targets the brain and nervous system. You can catch rabies if you are bitten by an infected animal and haven't been vaccinated. It's almost always fatal once symptoms develop, but can be prevented if treatment is given promptly after exposure. In the UK, rabies is not found in the animal population (with the exception of bats) and infections are almost always picked up during travel abroad. When to seek medical help Seek immediate medical advice if you're worried that you or your child may have been bitten, scratched or licked by an animal while abroad, or if you're bitten or scratched by a bat in any country, including the UK. Although rabies is unlikely, you should also seek immediate medical help if you're bitten or scratched by a pet that has travelled abroad and has an uncertain vaccination history. If you've been bitten or scratched, you should: wash the wound thoroughly with soap and water under a running tap for 15 minutes apply antiseptic or alcohol to clean the wound leave the wound open go to the nearest hospital or medical centre and explain that you've been bitten If the incident happens abroad, you should seek local medical help and not wait until you have returned to the UK. How rabies spreads Rabies can be spread to humans from infected animals through a bite, scratch or lick to broken skin, the mouth or the eye. You may also be at risk if an animal spits in your face. In very rare cases, rabies can be spread during an organ transplant. Once it enters the body, the rabies virus multiplies before spreading into nerve endings. It then travels to the spinal cord and brain (the central nervous system). Once the virus is in the central nervous system, it multiplies rapidly and spreads to the salivary glands, lungs, kidneys and other organs. Animals that carry rabies All mammals, including monkeys, can carry the rabies virus, but the following species are more commonly infected: dogs bats raccoons foxes jackals cats mongooses What are the symptoms? It can take a while for symptoms to develop, but when they do the condition is almost always fatal. Symptoms in humans can include: a high temperature (fever) an irrational fear of water (hydrophobia) sensitivity to light (photophobia) fear of drafts of air (aerophobia) confusion or aggressive behaviour Read more about the symptoms of rabies. Treating rabies If you have been exposed (bitten, scratched or licked) by an animal that might have rabies, you'll need to seek medical advice to determine whether you need to have a course of treatment to prevent rabies. This is known as post-exposure treatment. It's important this is done before you develop symptoms. Once symptoms develop, the infection cannot be treated and it's almost always fatal. Post-exposure treatment (preventing rabies) Post-exposure treatment usually involves administering a course of the rabies vaccine, with or without rabies immunoglobulin, in an attempt to prevent the infection spreading to the brain and nervous system. If started promptly, post-exposure treatment is very effective. However, if rabies infection reaches a stage where it causes symptoms, it's almost always fatal. In these cases, treatment will usually focus on making you as comfortable as possible. Rabies can only be diagnosed once you have developed the disease and get symptoms. Various tests, including a skin biopsy, saliva tests or blood tests, can be used to make the diagnosis. Read more about treating rabies. Vaccination A number of vaccines can be used to prevent a rabies infection developing. Routine (pre-exposure) vaccination is usually only recommended if you regularly work with potentially infected animals or are travelling to a part of the world known to have high levels of rabies and limited medical care. A course of rabies vaccine can also prevent rabies from developing after a potential exposure, provided it is started promptly. Before you travel, you should seek advice about whether you need a rabies vaccination. For more information, visit the National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) website. Read more about the rabies vaccination. Avoiding rabies When travelling in countries that aren't rabies-free, avoid contact with animals and educate your children about the dangers of petting them. Examine your children regularly for cuts and scratches after contact with any animal and ask how they got them. Make sure they know that being bitten or licked by an animal may be dangerous and they need to tell you about it. It's rare for bat rabies viruses to infect other animals, and the risk of human infection is thought to be low. Nevertheless, if you find an injured bat or a bat that needs to be moved, don't touch it. Call the Bat Conservation Trust helpline on 0345 1300 228 for advice. Quarantine and the Pet Travel Scheme (PETS) To keep countries rabies-free, it's important there are strict public health measures to control stray animals such as foxes. The movement of potentially infected animals across borders into uninfected regions is controlled by strictly enforcing quarantine regulations. Animals that don't have a licence shouldn't be brought into the UK. The Pet Travel Scheme is a system that allows pet dogs, cats and ferrets from certain countries to enter the UK without going into quarantine as long as they have been vaccinated. It also means people in the UK can take their dogs, cats and ferrets to other European Union (EU) countries and return with them to the UK. More information can be found on the GOV.UK website. How common is human rabies? There are an estimated 60,000 deaths from human rabies each year worldwide. Most cases occur in the developing world, particularly in Africa and Asia. As a result of strict UK quarantine laws regarding transporting animals, as well as the introduction of the Pet Travel Scheme, the UK has been rabies-free since the beginning of the 20th century, with the exception of a rabies-like virus in a single species of bat. There have been no cases of human rabies acquired in the UK since 1902, apart from a case of rabies acquired in a bat-handler from an infected bat in 2002. The last recorded case of rabies in the UK was in 2012. The patient, who died, contracted the disease after being bitten by a dog in India. Page last reviewed: 17\/02\/2015 Next review due: 17\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 261 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Animal and human bites Healthcare abroad Travel health Travel vaccinations External links National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC): rabies World Health Organization (WHO): rabies NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Radiation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Radiation","content":"Radiation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Radiation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Radiation Clinical trials Radiation Introduction  Radiation is a general term referring to any sort of energy that can travel through space either as a wave or a particle. Everyone is exposed to background radiation from natural sources such as soil, rocks and stones. Even water and certain foods, including nuts, bananas and potatoes, contain small traces of radiation. However, as background radiation occurs in low levels, it's very unlikely to cause health problems. Types of radiation There are two types of radiation that may be associated with health risks. These are: non-ionising radiation (low energy) ionising radiation (high energy) You'll usually only be exposed to man-made ionising radiation during certain medical tests, but the levels are so low that the chances of problems developing are small. Non-ionising radiation Examples of non-ionising radiation include: ultraviolet radiation visible light infrared radiation microwaves radio and radar waves wireless internet connections (wifi) mobile phone signals Overall, there's little evidence to suggest most types of non-ionising radiation are harmful at levels you're normally exposed to, but some forms of non-ionising radiation are potentially dangerous. Ultraviolet light The main proven danger of non-ionising radiation is damage to the skin caused by ultraviolet (UV) light. UV light primarily comes from the sun, but is also produced by sunbeds and sunlamps. Low levels of exposure to UV light are actually beneficial to health \u2013 sunlight helps our bodies produce vitamin D, which is important as it helps keeps bones strong and healthy. However, high levels of exposure to UV light can be harmful as it can cause sunburn, as well as increasing your risk of developing melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer. Telecommunications devices Some people have also argued telecommunications devices that use non-ionising radiation, such as mobile phones or wifi, could be potentially dangerous. But as yet, a number of British and international studies haven't identified any health risks associated with these devices. A research programme known as the Mobile Telecommunications and Health Research (MTHR) Programme is ongoing in the UK. Their reports in 2007 and 2012 concluded there's no evidence that short-term use of mobile phones increases the risk of cancer, or affects the normal functioning of the brain. This has been supported by further studies, which also show no link between mobile phones and problems such as cancer. However, as evidence is only based on mobile phone use over the last 20 years, there's still some uncertainty about possible long-term risks or associated problems. Read more about mobile phone safety Ionising radiation in medical tests and treatments Ionising radiation is a more powerful form of radiation than non-ionising radiation, and is more likely to cause damage to cells. Exposure to ionising radiation can increase the risk of cancer. High doses can cause serious damage, including radiation burns. One of the most common sources of exposure to man-made ionising radiation is during medical tests or treatments. However, while it may sound dangerous, the radiation used in medicine is closely controlled, and the risk of any problems resulting from exposure to radiation is very small. Examples of using ionising radiation to treat or diagnose a condition include: tests such as X-rays and CT scans \u2013 a low level of ionising radiation is used to produce images of the inside of the body nuclear medicine \u2013 for example, a mild radioactive substance can be injected into the bloodstream so it shows up better on an imaging scan radiotherapy \u2013 a common cancer treatment that uses ionising radiation to kill cancerous cells Measuring radiation exposure The low levels of radiation you are exposed to during medical tests can be measured in units called millisieverts (mSv). Some examples of different levels of radiation exposure are listed below. a single chest X-ray (0.014 mSv) \u2013 equivalent to three days of natural background radiation (read more about the risks of X-rays) a mammogram (0.4 mSv) \u2013 the amount of radiation a woman receives during a mammogram of both breasts (a type of X-ray used during breast cancer screening); the benefit of detecting breast cancer at an early stage is likely to outweigh the risk of any problems from the radiation exposure natural radiation (2.7 mSv) \u2013 the average annual dose a person in the UK receives from natural sources a computerised tomography (CT) scan of the whole spine (10 mSv) \u2013 the dose is lower for a CT scan of the head or chest; the benefits of having a CT scan usually greatly outweigh any potential risk (read more about the risks of CT scans) working with radiation (20 mSv) \u2013 the UK legal limit that a classified person who works with radiation may be exposed to in any given year (as set by the Ionising Radiations Regulations 1999); however, most workers receive considerably less than this Want to know more? GOV.UK: patient dose information  Health and Safety Executive: ionising radiation FAQs World Health Organization: what is ionising radiation? Occupational risk There's conflicting evidence about the risks faced by people who regularly work with radiation. This includes nuclear power workers and medical professionals who use radioactive technology, such as X-rays and CT scanners. Some studies have shown people working with radiation have a higher risk of problems such as cancer, heart disease and stroke, while other studies have indicated there's a lower risk of these problems. Improvements in safety standards mean it's now estimated only 6% of radiation workers are likely to be exposed to high levels of ionising radiation (100mSv or more) during their career, which should reduce the chances of problems developing. There's also currently no evidence that the children of people who work with radiation have an increased risk of developing serious health conditions, such as birth defects or leukaemia. Want to know more? Health and Safety Executive: information on doses Page last reviewed: 29\/01\/2015 Next review due: 29\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 142 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links CT scan Mobile phone safety Radiotherapy X-ray External links British Institute of Radiology GOV.UK: radiation Health and Safety Executive (HSE): radiation Society of Radiographers World Nuclear Association: radiation and life Worried about the latest health scare? Behind the Headlines can help you sort fact from fiction on the latest health scares and miracle cures in the media Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer Workplace health Improve your health at work, with tips on dealing with stress, RSI, back pain, exercise and healthy lunches NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Radiotherapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Radiotherapy","content":"Radiotherapy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Radiotherapy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Radiotherapy Clinical trials Radiotherapy Radiotherapy How it is performed Radiotherapy Side effects Introduction  Radiotherapy is a treatment involving the use of high-energy radiation. It's commonly used to treat cancer. Almost half of all people with cancer have radiotherapy as part of their treatment plan. Radiotherapy is also sometimes used to treat benign (non-cancerous) tumours and other conditions, such as thyroid disease and some blood disorders. This information focuses mainly on the use of radiotherapy as a treatment for cancer. Why it's used Radiotherapy can be used, alone or in combination with chemotherapy (chemoradiotherapy), to try to cure cancers. For people with incurable cancers, radiotherapy is a very effective way of controlling symptoms. Radiotherapy can also be used before surgery to shrink a tumour so it's easier to remove (known as neoadjuvant treatment), or after surgery to destroy small amounts of tumour that may be left (known as adjuvant treatment). How it's carried out Radiotherapy can be given in two different ways \u2013 from outside the body (external radiotherapy) or inside the body (internal radiotherapy). External radiotherapy usually involves using a machine called a linear accelerator, which focuses high-energy radiation beams onto the area requiring treatment. External beam radiotherapy is completely painless. External beam radiotherapy usually involves a series of daily treatments over a number of days or weeks. Internal radiotherapy can involve placing a small piece of radioactive material temporarily inside the body near the cancerous cells (known as brachytherapy), or the use of a radioactive liquid that's swallowed or injected. The radiation emitted by internal radiotherapy is painless, though the procedure to insert the source can sometimes cause mild discomfort. The type of radiotherapy you have and the length of treatment depends on the size and type of cancer, and where it is in your body. Read more about how radiotherapy is performed. How it works The high-energy radiation used during radiotherapy permanently damages the DNA of cancer cells, causing them to die. Nearby healthy tissues also suffer temporary cell damage from radiation, but these cells are usually able to repair the DNA damage and continue growing normally. Side effects The temporary DNA damage to normal tissues causes side effects, most of which are short-lived. Common side effects include sore skin, tiredness and hair loss. These tend to get better within a few days or weeks of treatment finishing. In rare cases, radiotherapy can cause significant long-term effects. For example, treatment to the genitals or pelvic region can cause permanent infertility. Read more about the side effects of radiotherapy. Results Despite the side effects, radiotherapy can be a highly effective treatment for cancer. 4 out of every 10 cancer cures include radiotherapy as part of the treatment plan. However, radiotherapy doesn't cause cancerous tumours to shrink immediately and it can take some time for the beneficial effects to become apparent. These effects depend on the type of cancer you have, other treatments that may be given alongside it (such as chemotherapy or surgery) and how advanced the tumour is when treatment begins. Does radiotherapy make you radioactive? External radiotherapy doesn't make you radioactive, as the radiation passes through your body. However, the radiation emitted by internal brachytherapy radioactive implants can be dangerous to other people while the implant is in place. You should discuss any safety concerns you have with your care team. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS organisations that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for breast cancer, bowel cancer and lung cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 01\/04\/2015 Next review due: 01\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 778 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 324  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 166  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 204  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cancer treatment: what happens during radiotherapy? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. See what happens during radiotherapy treatment. An expert describes what happens and advises what questions to ask if you're referred for radiotherapy. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Chemotherapy Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: radiotherapy Macmillan: radiotherapy Public Health England: medical radiation Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions, and where to go for further help and support NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ramsay Hunt syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Shingles\/Pages\/Complications.aspx","content":"Shingles - Complications - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Shingles - Complications  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Shingles Clinical trials Shingles Shingles Treatment Shingles Complications   Complications of shingles are more likely if you have a weakened immune system (the body's natural defence system) or are elderly. Some of the main complications associated with shingles are described below. Postherpetic neuralgia Postherpetic neuralgia is the most common complication of shingles. It's not clear exactly how many people are affected, but some estimates suggest as many as one in five people over 50 could develop postherpetic neuralgia as the result of shingles. Postherpetic neuralgia can cause severe nerve pain (neuralgia) and intense itching that persists after the rash and any other symptoms of shingles have gone. Types of pain experienced by people with postherpetic neuralgia include: constant or intermittent burning, aching, throbbing, stabbing, or shooting pain allodynia \u2013 where you feel pain from something that should not be painful, such as changes in temperature or the wind hyperalgesia \u2013 where you are very sensitive to pain Postherpetic neuralgia sometimes resolves after around three to six months, although it can last for years and some cases can be permanent. It can be treated with a number of different painkilling medicines. Read about treating postherpetic neuralgia. Eye problems If one of your eyes is affected by shingles (ophthalmic shingles), there's a risk you could develop further problems in the affected eye, such as: sores (ulceration) and permanent scarring of the surface of your eye (cornea) inflammation of the eye and optic nerve, the nerve that transmits signals from the eye to the brain glaucoma \u2013 where pressure builds up inside the eye If not treated promptly, there's a risk that ophthalmic shingles could cause a degree of permanent vision loss. Ramsay Hunt syndrome Ramsay Hunt syndrome is a complication that can occur if shingles affects certain nerves in your head. In the US Ramsay Hunt syndrome is estimated to affect 5 in 100,000 people every year, and may affect a similar number of people in the UK. Ramsay Hunt syndrome can cause: earache  hearing loss  dizziness the sensation that you or the environment around you is moving or spinning (vertigo)  hearing sounds coming from inside your body, rather than an outside source (tinnitus) a rash around the ear loss of taste weakness (paralysis) of your face Ramsay Hunt syndrome is usually treated with antiviral medication and corticosteroids. The earlier treatment is started, the better the outcome. Around three-quarters of people given antiviral medication within 72 hours of the start of their symptoms usually make a complete recovery. If treatment is delayed, only about half of those treated will recover completely. Those who don't make a full recovery may be left with permanent problems, such as a degree of permanent facial paralysis or hearing loss. Other complications A number of other possible problems can also sometimes develop as a result of shingles, including: the rash becoming infected with bacteria \u2013 see your GP if you develop a high temperature, as this could be a sign of a bacterial infection white patches (a loss of pigment) or scarring in the area of the rash inflammation of the lungs (pneumonia), liver (hepatitis), brain (encephalitis), spinal cord (transverse myelitis), or protective membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) \u2013 these complications are rare, however  Shingles is rarely life threatening, but complications like those mentioned above mean around 1 in every 1,000 cases in adults over the age of 70 is fatal. Page last reviewed: 08\/07\/2016 Next review due: 08\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 618 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 335  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 151  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chickenpox Coping with pain Postherpetic neuralgia Shingles vaccination External links Age UK Pain Concern Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rashes in babies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/skin-rash-babies","content":"Skin rashes in babies - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes please Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Skin rashes in babies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Skin rashes in babies   It's normal for babies to develop rashes from as early as a few days old, as their sensitive skin adapts to a different environment. Most rashes are harmless and go away on their own. But if your baby has developed a rash and seems unwell, or if you're worried, see your GP to find out the cause and receive any necessary treatment. It's especially important to be aware of the symptoms of meningitis. This guide may give you a better idea of the cause of the rash, but don't use it to diagnose your baby's condition. Always see a GP for a proper diagnosis. This page covers the following common rashes in babies: Baby acne (neonatal acne)  Cradle cap  Eczema  Erythema toxicum (the \"normal newborn rash\")  Hand, foot and mouth disease  Sweat rash (miliaria)  Hives (urticaria)  Impetigo  Milia (blocked oil glands)  Nappy rash  Ringworm  Scabies  Slapped cheek syndrome  It also describes the warning signs of meningitis and explains what to do if you're worried about your baby. The causes of rashes in older children are covered separately. Baby acne (neonatal acne) Pimples sometimes develop on a baby's cheeks, nose and forehead within a month of their birth. These tend to get worse before clearing up completely after a few weeks or months. Washing your baby's face with water and a mild moisturiser can improve the appearance of their skin. Avoid acne medicines intended for older children and adults. Pimples or blackheads that develop after three months of age (infantile acne) tend to be more severe and often need medical treatment. Cradle cap Cradle cap is where yellowish, greasy, scaly patches develop on a baby's scalp. Occasionally, the face, ears and neck are also affected. Cradle cap isn't itchy and shouldn't bother your baby. If your baby is scratching or upset, they may have eczema (see below). Cradle cap is a common condition that tends to develop within two or three months after birth. It usually gets better without treatment in a few weeks or months. Gently washing your baby's hair and scalp with baby shampoo may help to prevent further patches developing. Read more about treating cradle cap. Eczema Eczema is a long-term condition that causes the skin to become itchy, red, dry and cracked. The most common form is atopic eczema, which mainly affects babies and children but can continue into adulthood. Eczema in babies under six months is sometimes associated with allergies to milk and egg. Atopic eczema often starts in young babies as a red, itchy rash on the face, scalp and body. As the child gets older, it usually starts to develop in areas with folds of skin, such as behind the knees or on the front of the elbows. Creams and ointments can often relieve the symptoms. Read more about managing your baby's eczema. Erythema toxicum Half of all newborns develop a blotchy red skin reaction called erythema toxicum, usually at two or three days old. It's a normal newborn rash that won't bother your baby and clears after a few days. Hand, foot and mouth disease Hand, foot and mouth disease is a common, viral illness that causes a blistery rash on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, as well as ulcers in the mouth. Your baby may also feel unwell and have a fever. Treatment isn't usually needed, as the baby's immune system clears the virus, and symptoms go away after about 7 to 10 days. If you're worried, see your GP. Hives (urticaria) Hives (also known as urticaria) is a raised, red itchy rash that appears on the skin. It happens when a trigger (such as a food that your baby is allergic to) causes a substance called histamine to be released into their skin. If your baby gets urticaria during feeding, the condition may be triggered by something they've had to eat or drink. The most common foods are egg and milk, but many other foods can sometimes be the cause. The urticaria rash is usually short-lived and can be controlled with antihistamines. Read more about treating hives. If your baby gets hives repeatedly, it's important to see your GP to discuss possible allergies. Impetigo Impetigo is a highly contagious bacterial infection of the surface layers of the skin, which causes sores and blisters. It's not usually serious, but you can visit your GP for a prescription of antibiotics, which should clear the infection within 7 to 10 days. Read more about treating impetigo. Milia  About half of all newborns develop tiny (1-2mm) white spots, called milia, on their face. These are just blocked pores and usually clear within the first four weeks of life. Nappy rash Nappy rash occurs when the skin around the baby's nappy area becomes irritated. This is often caused by prolonged exposure to wee or poo, but can sometimes be the result of a fungal infection or rare skin condition. You can usually reduce nappy rash by taking simple steps to keep your baby's skin clean and dry, and using a barrier cream if needed. Antifungal cream may be necessary if the rash is caused by a fungal infection. Read more about nappies and nappy rash. Ringworm Ringworm is a common fungal skin infection that causes a ring-like red rash almost anywhere on the body (the baby's scalp, feet and groin are common areas). It's usually easily treated using over-the-counter creams. Read more about treating ringworm. Scabies Scabies is a common infestation of the skin that can affect people of all ages. It's caused by tiny mites that burrow into the skin. It's often spread between family members, so when babies get scabies it's usually because someone else in the family had it recently. Babies with scabies develop tiny and very itchy spots all over the body, including on the soles of the feet, armpits and genital area. Treatment with creams that kill the scabies mite needs to be given to the whole family at the same time for it to be effective. Slapped cheek syndrome Slapped cheek syndrome is a viral infection particularly common in children and babies. It typically causes a bright red rash on both cheeks and a fever. Most babies won't need treatment, as slapped cheek syndrome is usually a mild condition that passes in a few days. Sweat rash (miliaria) A heat rash, sometimes called miliaria or prickly heat, may flare up when your baby sweats \u2013 for example, because they're dressed in too many clothes or the environment is hot and humid. It's a sign your baby's sweat glands have become blocked. They may develop tiny red bumps or blisters on their skin, but these will soon clear without treatment. Meningitis warning signs It's important to be aware of the warning signs of meningitis in your baby, which include: becoming floppy and unresponsive, or stiff with jerky movements becoming irritable and not wanting to be held unusual crying vomiting and refusing feeds pale and blotchy skin loss of appetite staring expression very sleepy with a reluctance to wake up fever  Some babies develop a swelling in the soft part of their head (fontanelle). Trust your instincts. If you think your baby has meningitis, see your GP immediately or go to your nearest accident & emergency (A&E) department.  Page last reviewed: 02\/07\/2015 Next review due: 02\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 197 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the baby rashes information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/baby_rashes_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Infectious illnesses in children Skin conditions slideshow Skin rashes in children Information and advice about the most common rashes that affect children Learn to recognise meningitis This symptom alert shows the signs and includes a printable checklist NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Raynaud's phenomenon","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Raynauds-phenomenon","content":"Raynaud's phenomenon - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Raynaud's phenomenon  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Raynauds-phenomenon Clinical trials Raynauds-phenomenon Community Raynaud's phenomenon Raynauds-phenomenon Causes Raynauds-phenomenon Diagnosis Raynauds-phenomenon Treatment Raynauds-phenomenon Complications Introduction  Raynaud\u2019s phenomenon is a common condition that affects the blood supply to certain parts of the body \u2013 usually the fingers and toes. It's often referred to as Raynaud\u2019s syndrome, Raynaud\u2019s disease or just Raynaud's. Why does it happen? Raynaud\u2019s is usually triggered by cold temperatures, anxiety or stress. The condition occurs because your blood vessels go into a temporary spasm, which blocks the flow of blood. This causes the affected area to change colour to white, then blue and then red, as the bloodflow returns. You may also experience numbness, pain, and pins and needles. Symptoms of Raynaud's can last from a few minutes to several hours. It's not a serious threat to your health, but can be annoying to live with, because it can be difficult to use your fingers. People with Raynaud\u2019s often go for long periods without any symptoms, and sometimes the condition goes away altogether. Other parts of the body that can be affected by Raynaud\u2019s include the ears, nose, nipples and lips. Treating Raynaud's In many cases, it may be possible to control the symptoms of Raynaud\u2019s yourself by avoiding the cold, wearing gloves and using relaxation techniques when feeling stressed. Stopping smoking can also improve symptoms, as smoking can affect your circulation. If you're unable to control your symptoms yourself, then a medication called nifedipine may be recommended. Read more about treating Raynaud\u2019s. Types of Raynaud's There are two types of Raynaud's: primary \u2013 when the condition develops by itself (this is the most common type) secondary \u2013 when it's caused by another health condition Most cases of secondary Raynaud\u2019s are associated with conditions that cause the immune system to attack healthy tissue (autoimmune conditions), such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. The causes of primary Raynaud\u2019s are unclear. However 1 in 10 people with primary Raynaud\u2019s goes on to develop a condition associated with secondary Raynaud\u2019s, such as lupus. Your GP can help to determine whether you have primary or secondary Raynaud's by examining your symptoms and carrying out blood tests. Read more about what causes Raynaud\u2019s and diagnosing Raynaud's. Possible complications Secondary Raynaud\u2019s can severely restrict the blood supply, so it carries a higher risk of complications, such as ulcers, scarring and even tissue death (gangrene) in the most serious cases. However, severe complications are rare. Read more about the complications of Raynaud\u2019s. Who gets Raynaud\u2019s? Raynaud\u2019s phenomenon is a common condition. It affects up to 20% of the adult population worldwide. There may be as many as 10 million people with the condition in the UK. Primary Raynaud\u2019s usually begins in your 20s or 30s. Secondary Raynaud\u2019s can develop at any age, depending on the cause. Raynaud's is slightly more common in women than men. Page last reviewed: 03\/03\/2015 Next review due: 03\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 827 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 358  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 246  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 109  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cold weather advice Stress, anxiety and depression Workplace health External links Scleroderma & Raynaud's UK (SRUK) Community content from HealthUnlocked Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Very cold weather Ways to keep warm and look after vulnerable people if the weather turns extremely cold NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Reactive arthritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Reactive-arthritis","content":"Reactive arthritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Reactive arthritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Reactive-arthritis Clinical trials Reactive arthritis Reactive-arthritis Symptoms Reactive-arthritis Causes Reactive-arthritis Treatment Introduction   Reactive arthritis, formerly known as Reiter's syndrome, is a condition that causes inflammation (redness and swelling) in various places in the body. It usually develops following an infection, and in most cases clears up in a few months without causing long-term problems. The three most common places affected by reactive arthritis are: the joints (arthritis), which can cause pain, stiffness and swelling the eyes (conjunctivitis), which can cause eye pain and redness the urethra (non-gonococcal urethritis), which can cause pain when urinating (the urethra is the tube that carries urine out of the body)  However, most people will not experience all of these problems.  Read more about the symptoms of reactive arthritis. What causes reactive arthritis? Reactive arthritis usually develops within four weeks of an infection, typically after a sexually transmitted infection (STI) such as chlamydia, or an infection of the bowel. For reasons that are still unclear, the immune system (the body's defence against infection) appears to malfunction in response to the infection and starts attacking healthy tissue, causing it to become inflamed. Read more about the causes of reactive arthritis. Seeking medical advice See your GP if you have swollen and painful joints, especially if you have recently had symptoms of an infection such as diarrhoea or pain when passing urine. There is no single test for reactive arthritis, although blood and urine tests, genital swabs and X-rays may be used to check for infection and rule out other causes of your symptoms. Your GP will also want to know about your recent medical history, such as whether you may have recently had a bowel infection or an STI. How reactive arthritis is treated There is currently no cure for reactive arthritis, but most people get better in around six months. Meanwhile, treatment can help to relieve symptoms such as pain and stiffness. Symptoms can often be controlled using non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and painkillers such as ibuprofen. Severe symptoms may require more powerful steroid medication (corticosteroids) or disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs). Read more about treating reactive arthritis. Who is affected Reactive arthritis can occur at any age, but it most commonly affects young adults aged 20-40. Men are generally affected more than woman \u2013 particularly in cases linked to STIs, which are estimated to be about 10 times more common in men. People who have a certain gene called HLA-B27, which is found in around one in every 10 people in the UK, are about thought to be around 50 times more likely to develop reactive arthritis than those who don't have this gene. Preventing reactive arthritis The most effective way to reduce your risk of reactive arthritis is to avoid the STIs and bowel infections that most commonly cause the condition. The most effective way of preventing STIs is to always use a barrier method of contraception, such as a condom, during sex with a new partner.  Read advice on STIs, contraception and sexual health. Ensuring good standards of hygiene when preparing and storing food can help to prevent gastrointestinal infections. Read about food safety and preventing food poisoning. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/01\/2015 Next review due: 08\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 108 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Conjunctivitis Joint pain STIs Urethritis External links Arthritis Care: reactive arthritis Arthritis Research UK: reactive arthritis The Pain Toolkit Pain Concern Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Symptoms to look out for, where to go for help and how to protect yourself. Plus, real-life stories from people with infections How to prepare and cook food safely How to prepare and cook food correctly to reduce the risk of food poisoning, including E. coli NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Recovery position","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Accidents-and-first-aid\/Pages\/The-recovery-position.aspx","content":"First aid - Recovery position - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories First aid - Recovery position  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Accidents-and-first-aid Clinical trials First aid Accidents-and-first-aid After an incident Accidents-and-first-aid CPR Accidents-and-first-aid Recovery position The recovery position  If a person is unconscious but is breathing and has no other life-threatening conditions, they should be placed in the recovery position. Putting someone in the recovery position will keep their airway clear and open. It also ensures that any vomit or fluid won't cause them to choke. The video on this page shows a step-by-step guide to putting someone in the recovery position. Or you can follow these steps: with the person lying on their back, kneel on the floor at their side place the arm nearest you at a right angle to their body with their hand upwards, towards the head tuck their other hand under the side of their head, so that the back of their hand is touching their cheek bend the knee farthest from you to a right angle carefully roll the person onto their side by pulling on the bent knee the top arm should be supporting the head and the bottom arm will stop you rolling them too far open their airway by gently tilting their head back and lifting their chin, and check that nothing is blocking their airway stay with the person and monitor their condition until help arrives Spinal injury If you think a person may have a spinal injury, don't attempt to move them until the emergency services reach you. If it's necessary to open their airway, place your hands on either side of their head and gently lift their jaw with your fingertips to open the airway. Take care not to move their neck. You should suspect a spinal injury if the person: has been involved in an incident that's directly affected their spine, such as a fall from height or being struck directly in the back complains of severe pain in their neck or back won't move their neck feels weak, numb or paralysed has lost control of their limbs, bladder or bowels Page last reviewed: 08\/01\/2016 Next review due: 08\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 278 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 200  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful How to put someone into the recovery position Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This video provides a step-by-step guide on how to put someone into the recovery position. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2016 Next review due: 21\/04\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links When to dial 999 Baby and toddler safety Black eye Find services: A&E Find services: Minor injuries units External links St John Ambulance: courses British Red Cross: courses RoSPA: accident prevention St. Andrews First Aid Resuscitation Council (UK) Child Accident Prevention Trust First aid kit for babies Every year, more than a million children have an accident at home. Make sure your first aid kit is stocked and ready If your child has an accident How to deal with accidents and injuries, including cuts and broken bones NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rectal bleeding","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/rectal-bleeding","content":"Rectal bleeding - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rectal bleeding  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview rectal-bleeding Real stories Rectal bleeding Introduction  Rectal bleeding (bleeding from the bottom) is often noticed as small amounts of bright-red blood on toilet paper or a few droplets that turn the water in the toilet pink. In general, bright-red blood means the bleeding has come from somewhere near your anus and is a typical sign of piles (haemorrhoids) or a small tear (anal fissure) in the skin of your anus. Although these are common problems, don't let embarrassment stop you seeing your GP. You should always get rectal bleeding checked to rule out more serious causes. Around 10% of adults experience rectal bleeding every year in the UK. If the blood is darker in colour and sticky, the bleeding may have occurred higher up your digestive system. This type of bleeding can turn your faeces black or plum-coloured (known as melaena). Having plum-coloured, dark and sticky faeces may be a medical emergency \u2013 you should see your GP immediately or contact NHS 111. How your GP investigates rectal bleeding If your GP needs to examine you to find out what's causing your rectal bleeding, they may carry out a rectal examination. This involves putting a gloved finger inside your bottom (rectum). There's no need to feel embarrassed or nervous: it's a quick and painless procedure that GPs are used to doing. The examination usually takes one to five minutes, depending on whether your GP finds anything unusual. You may be referred to a hospital or specialist clinic if further examinations and tests are needed. Is it bowel cancer? Many people with rectal bleeding worry they may have bowel cancer. While rectal bleeding can be a sign of early-stage bowel cancer, other factors may also be present for your doctor to think you're at risk. You should be urgently referred to a specialist with suspected bowel cancer if you have rectal bleeding and: you're aged 40 or older and have passed looser or more frequent stools for the last six weeks you're aged 60 or older and the bleeding has lasted for six weeks or more your GP has found an abnormality (such as a lump) after examining you  you also have anaemia (a reduced number of red blood cells) you have a family history of bowel cancer you have ulcerative colitis Bowel cancer is sometimes called colon or rectal cancer, depending on where the cancer starts. Find out more about bowel cancer, and read the NICE guidelines for being referred with suspected cancer. Common causes of rectal bleeding Some of the most common causes of visible rectal bleeding in adults are outlined below. However, don't try to diagnose yourself, and always see your GP for a proper diagnosis. Click on the links for more information about these causes. piles (haemorrhoids) \u2013 swollen blood vessels in and around the rectum. They can bleed when you have a bowel movement, which can leave streaks of bright-red blood in your stools and on the toilet paper. Piles may also cause itchiness around your anus. They often heal on their own. anal fissure \u2013 a small tear in the skin of the anus, which can be painful as the skin is very sensitive. The blood is usually bright red and the bleeding soon stops. You may feel like you need to keep passing stools, even when your bowel is empty. It often heals on its own within a few weeks. anal fistula \u2013 a small channel that develops between the end of the bowel, known as the anal canal or back passage, and the skin near the anus (the opening where waste leaves the body). They're usually painful and can cause bleeding when you go to the toilet. angiodysplasia \u2013 abnormal blood vessels in the gastrointestinal tract, which can cause bleeding. It's more common in older people and can cause painless rectal bleeding. gastroenteritis \u2013 a viral or bacterial infection of the stomach and bowel, which your immune system usually fights off after a few days. It can cause diarrhoea containing traces of blood and mucus, as well as vomiting and stomach cramps. diverticula \u2013 small bulges in the lining of your lower bowel. These contain weakened blood vessels that can burst and cause sudden, painless bleeding (you may pass quite a lot of blood in your stools). bowel cancer (colon or rectal cancer) \u2013 you should always get checked by your GP if you have rectal bleeding. The only symptom of bowel cancer may be rectal bleeding in the early stages, so don't ignore it. Bowel cancer can be treated more easily if it's diagnosed at an early stage. Less common causes of rectal bleeding Some of the more unusual causes of rectal bleeding include: anticoagulant drugs \u2013 such as warfarin or aspirin, which are taken to reduce your chance of a blood clot but can sometimes cause internal bleeding. inflammatory bowel disease \u2013 such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis. These long-term conditions cause the lining of the bowel to become inflamed. Crohn's disease affects the gut higher up, whereas ulcerative colitis affects the large bowel and rectum further down. Both tend to cause bloody diarrhoea. bowel polyps \u2013 small growths on the inner lining of the colon or rectum. These are common and often don't cause symptoms, but may lead to a small amount of blood in your stool. sexually transmitted infections (STIs) \u2013 any sexual activity involving the anal area can spread STIs, which may sometimes lead to rectal bleeding. Read more about the risks of anal sex. Page last reviewed: 12\/01\/2015 Next review due: 12\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1453 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 777  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 408  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 136  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anal fissure Anal pain Piles (haemorrhoids) Rectal examination External links Lab Tests Online: faecal occult blood test Bowel cancer symptom checker Use this symptom checker to find out if your symptoms require further investigation Blood in your urine Finding blood in your urine can be scary and must be investigated by a doctor, but it's not usually a sign of anything life threatening NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rectal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel","content":"Bowel cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bowel cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Real stories Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Community Bowel cancer Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Symptoms Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Causes Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Treatment Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Living with Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Prevention Cancer-of-the-colon-rectum-or-bowel Screening Introduction  Bowel cancer is a general term for cancer that begins in the large bowel. Depending on where the cancer starts, bowel cancer is sometimes called colon or rectal cancer. Cancer can sometimes start in the small bowel (small intestine), but small bowel cancer is much rarer than large bowel cancer. Bowel cancer is one of the most common types of cancer diagnosed in the UK, with around 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. About 1 in every 20 people in the UK will develop bowel cancer in their lifetime. Signs and symptoms The three main symptoms of bowel cancer are blood in the stools (faeces), changes in bowel habit \u2013 such as more frequent, looser stools \u2013 and abdominal (tummy) pain. However, these symptoms are very common and most people with them do not have bowel cancer. For example, blood in the stools is more often caused by haemorrhoids (piles), and a change in bowel habit or abdominal pain is usually the result of something you have eaten. As almost 9 out of 10 people with bowel cancer are over the age of 60, these symptoms are more important as people get older. They are also more significant when they persist despite simple treatments. Most people who are eventually diagnosed with bowel cancer have one of the following combination of symptoms: a persistent change in bowel habit that causes them to go to the toilet more often and pass looser stools, usually together with blood on or in their stools a persistent change in bowel habit without blood in their stools, but with abdominal pain blood in the stools without other haemorrhoid symptoms, such as soreness, discomfort, pain, itching or a lump hanging down outside the back passage abdominal pain, discomfort or bloating always provoked by eating, sometimes resulting in a reduction in the amount of food eaten and weight loss The symptoms of bowel cancer can be subtle and don't necessarily make you feel ill. Read more about the symptoms of bowel cancer. When to seek medical advice Try the bowel cancer symptom checker for advice on treatments you can try to see if your symptoms get better, and when you should see your GP to discuss whether any tests are necessary. Your doctor will probably carry out a simple examination of your tummy and bottom to make sure you have no lumps. They may also arrange for a simple blood test to check for iron deficiency anaemia \u2013 this can indicate whether there is any bleeding from your bowel that you haven't been aware of. In some cases, your doctor may decide it is best for you to have a simple test in hospital to make sure there is no serious cause for your symptoms. Make sure you return to your doctor if your symptoms persist or keep coming back after stopping treatment, regardless of their severity or your age. Read more about diagnosing bowel cancer. Who's at risk? It's not known exactly what causes bowel cancer, but there are a number of things that can increase your risk. These include: age \u2013 almost 9 in 10 cases of bowel cancer occur in people aged 60 or over diet \u2013 a diet high in red or processed meats and low in fibre can increase your risk weight \u2013 bowel cancer is more common in people who are overweight or obese exercise \u2013 being inactive increases the risk of getting bowel cancer alcohol and smoking \u2013 a high alcohol intake and smoking may increase your chances of getting bowel cancer family history \u2013 having a close relative (mother or father, brother or sister) who developed bowel cancer under the age of 50 puts you at a greater lifetime risk of developing the condition Some people have an increased risk of bowel cancer because they have another condition that affects their bowel, such as severe ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, over a long period of time. Read more about the causes of bowel cancer and preventing bowel cancer. Bowel cancer screening To detect cases of bowel cancer sooner, the NHS offers two types of bowel cancer screening to adults registered with a GP in England: faecal occult blood (FOB) test \u2013 all men and women aged 60 to 74 are invited to carry out an FOB test at home. They're sent the home test kit every two years through the post until they reach the age of 74. The FOB test checks for the presence of blood in a stool sample, which could be an early sign of bowel cancer. bowel scope screening \u2013 this additional one-off test is being gradually introduced in England. It is offered to men and women at the age of 55. As of March 2015, about two-thirds of screening centres were beginning to offer this test to 55-year-olds. It involves a doctor or nurse using a thin, flexible instrument to look inside the lower part of the bowel and remove any small growths called polyps, which could eventually turn into cancer. Screening plays an important part in the fight against bowel cancer as it can help detect bowel cancer before it causes obvious symptoms, which increases the chances of people surviving the condition. Read more about screening for bowel cancer. Treatment and outlook Bowel cancer can be treated using a combination of different treatments, depending on where the cancer is in your bowel and how far it has spread. The main treatments are: surgery \u2013 the cancerous section of bowel is removed; it is the most effective way of curing bowel cancer, and is all that many people need chemotherapy \u2013 where medication is used to kill cancer cells  radiotherapy \u2013 where radiation is used to kill cancer cells biological treatments \u2013 a newer type of medication that increases the effectiveness of chemotherapy and prevents the cancer spreading As with most types of cancer, the chances of a complete cure depends on how far it has advanced by the time it is diagnosed. If the cancer is confined to the bowel, surgery will usually be able to completely remove it. Overall, 7 to 8 in every 10 people with bowel cancer will live at least one year after diagnosis. More than half of those diagnosed will live at least another 10 years. Every year, around 16,000 people die as a result of bowel cancer. Read more about how bowel cancer is treated and living with bowel cancer. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS bodies that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for bowel cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 788 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 389  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 193  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_63\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Bowel cancer screening Bowel cancer and red meat risk Bowel polyps Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Beating Bowel Cancer Bowel Cancer Information Bowel Cancer UK Cancer Research UK healthtalk.org: colorectal cancer Macmillan Cancer Support My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Bowel Cancer Screening NHS cancer screening There are some types of cancers you can get free routine screening for NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rectal examination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rectal-examination","content":"Rectal examination - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rectal examination  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rectal-examination Clinical trials Rectal examination Rectal-examination How it is performed Introduction  A rectal examination is a type of physical examination during which a doctor or nurse inserts a finger into your rectum (back passage) to feel for abnormalities. It's sometimes known as a digital rectal examination (DRE). Some people find having a rectal examination embarrassing, but it only takes a few minutes and isn't usually painful.  Read more about how a rectal examination is performed. What it's used for One of the most common reasons for having a rectal examination is if a man has a suspected problem with his prostate gland (see below), which could be a sign of prostate disease or prostate cancer.  A rectal examination may also be needed if a person develops changes in their normal bowel habits, which could indicate a problem with their digestive system. These changes could include: bleeding from your rectum  constipation loss of normal bowel function, also called bowel incontinence (and occasionally urinary incontinence) pain in your bottom (proctalgia)  The prostate gland    The prostate gland is a small gland found only in men. It's located in the pelvis, between the penis and bladder, and surrounds the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the penis). The prostate gland can be examined by placing a finger into the rectum. The doctor carrying out the examination will be able to feel any changes in the prostate, such as swelling and hardening. The prostate gland often becomes larger in older men. This can place pressure on the bladder and urethra, causing symptoms such as: difficulty beginning to urinate a flow of urine that's weak or stops and starts having to push or strain to pass urine a frequent need to urinate waking up frequently during the night to urinate Prostate enlargement can be troublesome to live with, but it doesn't pose a threat to health. However, its symptoms are similar to the symptoms of prostate cancer, and a rectal examination is one way of finding out whether the symptoms are caused by prostate enlargement or prostate cancer. Prostate cancer can cause the surface of the prostate gland to become hard and bumpy, while prostate enlargement doesn't usually affect the surface. A rectal examination isn't a guaranteed way of diagnosing prostate cancer, so it's usually used in combination with other tests, such as a blood test and a biopsy (where a small sample of the prostate gland is removed for further testing). Prostate enlargement animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Prostate enlargement or benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common condition in older men. This animation explains what the prostate gland is and how it functions. It also highlights the importance of seeing your GP to check for prostate cancer. Media last reviewed: 22\/01\/2016 Next review due: 22\/01\/2018 Page last reviewed: 06\/01\/2015 Next review due: 06\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 146 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anal fissure Constipation Haemorrhoids (piles) Prostate cancer Prostate enlargement Prostate health External links Prostate Cancer Research Centre CORE: digestive disorders charity Prostate Cancer UK Rectal bleeding What to do if you are bleeding from the bottom, and the common causes Know your prostate What is the prostate gland and what does it do? Find out how it can go wrong and whether you're at risk of prostate cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rectocele","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prolapse-of-the-uterus","content":"Pelvic organ prolapse - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic organ prolapse  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prolapse-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Pelvic organ prolapse Prolapse-of-the-uterus Treatment Introduction  Pelvic organ prolapse is bulging of one or more of the pelvic organs into the vagina. These organs are the uterus, vagina, bowel and bladder. Symptoms may include: a sensation of a bulge or something coming down or out of the vagina, which sometimes needs to be pushed back discomfort during sex problems passing urine \u2013 such as slow stream, a feeling of not emptying the bladder fully, needing to urinate more often and leaking a small amount of urine when you cough, sneeze or exercise (stress incontinence) Some women with a pelvic organ prolapse don't have any symptoms and the condition is only discovered during an internal examination for another reason, such as a cervical screening. When to see your GP Pelvic organ prolapse isn't life-threatening, but it can affect your quality of life. See your GP if you have any of the symptoms of a prolapse, or if you notice a lump in or around your vagina. Internal pelvic examination Your doctor will need to carry out an internal pelvic examination. They'll ask you to undress from the waist down and lie back on the examination bed, while they feel for any lumps in your pelvic area. Some women may put off going to their GP if they're embarrassed or worried about what the doctor may find. However, the examination is important, only takes a few minutes and is similar to having a smear test. Further tests If you have bladder symptoms, such as needing to rush to the toilet or leaking when you cough and sneeze, further tests may need to be carried out in hospital. For example, a small tube (catheter) may be inserted into your bladder to examine your bladder function and identify any leakage problems. This test is known as urodynamics. Your doctor will decide if further tests are needed before treating the prolapse. Types of prolapse If pelvic organ prolapse is confirmed, it will usually be staged to indicate how severe it is. Most often, a number system is used, ranging from one to four, with four indicating a severe prolapse. Pelvic organ prolapse can affect the front, top or back of the vagina. The main types of prolapse are: anterior prolapse (cystocele) \u2013 where the bladder bulges into the front wall of the vagina prolapse of the uterus and cervix or top of the vagina \u2013 which can be the result of previous treatment to remove the womb (hysterectomy) posterior wall prolapse (rectocoele or enterocoele) \u2013 when the bowel bulges forward into the back wall of the vagina It's possible to have more than one of these types of prolapse at the same time. Why does prolapse happen? Prolapse is caused by weakening of tissues that support the pelvic organs. Although there's rarely a single cause, the risk of developing pelvic organ prolapse can be increased by: your age \u2013 prolapse is more common as you get older childbirth, particularly if you had a long or difficult labour, or gave birth to multiple babies or a large baby \u2013 up to half of all women who have had children are affected by some degree of prolapse changes caused by the menopause \u2013 such as weakening of tissue and low levels of the hormone oestrogen being overweight, obese or having large fibroids (non-cancerous tumours in or around the womb) or pelvic cysts \u2013 which creates extra pressure in the pelvic area previous pelvic surgery \u2013 such as a hysterectomy or bladder repair repeated heavy lifting and manual work long-term coughing or sneezing \u2013 for example, if you smoke, have a lung condition or allergy excessive straining when going to the toilet because of long-term constipation Certain conditions can also cause the tissues in your body to become weak, making a prolapse more likely, including: joint hypermobility syndrome \u2013 where your joints are very loose Marfan syndrome \u2013 an inherited condition that affects the blood vessels, eyes and skeleton Ehlers-Danlos syndrome \u2013 a group of inherited conditions that affect collagen proteins in the body Can a prolapse be prevented? There are several things you can do to reduce your risk of prolapse, including: doing regular pelvic floor exercises maintaining a healthy weight or losing weight if you're overweight eating a high-fibre diet with plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and wholegrain bread and cereal to avoid constipation and straining when going to the toilet avoiding heavy lifting If you smoke, stopping smoking may also help to reduce your risk of a prolapse. How is prolapse treated? Many women with prolapse don't need treatment, as the problem doesn't seriously interfere with their normal activities. Lifestyle changes such as weight loss and pelvic floor exercises are usually recommended in mild cases. If the symptoms require treatment, a prolapse may be treated effectively using a device inserted into the vagina, called a vaginal pessary. This helps to hold the prolapsed organ in place. Surgery may also be an option for some women. This usually involves giving support to the prolapsed organ. In some cases, complete removal of the womb (hysterectomy) is required, especially if the womb has prolapsed out. Most women experience a better quality of life after surgery, but there's a risk of problems remaining or even getting worse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/02\/2015 Next review due: 05\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1570 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 633  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 471  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 170  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 215  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Hysterectomy Urinary incontinence Women's health 40-60 External links MHRA: safety of vaginal meshes for pelvic organ prolapse NICE: infracoccygeal sacropexy using mesh NICE: insertion of mesh uterine suspension sling NHS leaflet: what is a sacrospinous fixation? (PDF, 65Kb) NICE: sacrocolpopexy with hysterectomy using mesh Women's Health Concern: prolapse Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Your body after childbirth Having a baby changes your body. Here's how it may change and some exercises and techniques to help. Find and choose services for Prolapse of the uterus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Recurrent limb pain in children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/growing-pains","content":"Growing pains - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Growing pains (recurrent limb pain in children)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Growing pains Introduction  Growing pains are aches or pains, usually in the lower legs, that develop in the evening or night. Children aged between three and 12 may be affected. Although they can be distressing, growing pains are fairly common and don't cause long-term harm. Despite the name, there's no clear evidence to suggest that growing pains are the result of growth spurts. This is why some doctors prefer to use the term 'recurrent nocturnal limb pain in children'. What are the symptoms? Growing pains are felt as intense, cramp-like pain in both legs. They most often affect the calves, shins or ankles, but can also affect the thighs. The pains develop in the evening or at night (often after more active days), but shouldn't be present in the morning. Your child's ability to walk shouldn't be affected by growing pains and there should be no signs of limp, physical injury or infection. If your child's symptoms are different to those described above it's unlikely they have growing pains. For example, if only one leg is affected or they're limping. In these cases, take your child to see a GP (see below), as they may have an underlying medical condition. What causes growing pains? The cause of growing pains is unknown, although they seem to be more common in active children and children with loose, flexible joints (joint hypermobility). They also tend to run in families. There's no clear evidence to suggest they're the result of growth spurts or any underlying conditions. What to do Growing pains can usually be treated at home. You can give your child paracetamol or ibuprofen to manage the pain. Sometimes, giving them painkillers before bedtime after an active day can prevent them waking in the night. However, children under 16 should not be given aspirin unless your doctor specifically advises this. You can also try firmly massaging your child's leg muscles and joints or applying warmth to their legs, for example with heat packs. Supportive footwear such as trainers might help prevent growing pains. Make sure any shoelaces are tied and that shoes with Velcro are fastened firmly. When to see your GP See your GP if your child's symptoms are particularly severe or suggest they may have another condition, such as: pain in just one leg pain also affecting the arms or back pain that occurs every night or continues during the day swollen joints a high temperature (fever) loss of appetite weight loss reluctance to walk, or a limp with no obvious cause Your GP will want to rule out an injury or other illnesses, such as arthritis, vitamin D deficiency (rickets) or even leukaemia if your child is unwell. They may refer your child to hospital for further assessment. Link with restless legs syndrome? Some doctors are investigating whether there's a link between growing pains and restless legs syndrome (RLS). RLS is a condition of the nervous system that causes: an overwhelming urge to move the legs an unpleasant sensation in the legs that eases once the legs are moved It's not currently known whether growing pains are an early form of RLS, or an entirely separate condition. Page last reviewed: 04\/03\/2016 Next review due: 04\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 299 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 168  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Restless legs syndrome Limping in children Child health 6-15 Keeping babies and toddlers active Find out how to keep young children active and healthy all year round Get active with your child Children need plenty of exercise. Learn how to get your child outside and active NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Red blood cell count","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Red-blood-count","content":"Red blood cell count - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Red blood cell count  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Red-blood-count Clinical trials Introduction Introduction  A red blood cell (RBC) count is a blood test that tells you how many red blood cells you have. Red blood cells contain a substance called haemoglobin which transports oxygen around the body. The amount of oxygen that's delivered to your body's tissues will depend on the number of red blood cells you have and how well they work. A RBC count is usually carried out as part of a full blood cell (FBC) count. A normal RBC count would be: male \u2013 4.7 to 6.1 million cells per microlitre (cells\/mcL) female \u2013 4.2 to 5.4 million cells\/mcL The results of an RBC count can be used to help diagnose blood-related conditions, such as iron deficiency anaemia (where there are less red blood cells than normal). A low RBC count could also indicate a vitamin B6, B12 or folate deficiency. It may also signify internal bleeding, kidney disease or malnutrition (where a person's diet doesn't contain enough nutrients to meet their body's needs). A high RBC count could be due to a number of health conditions or health-related factors including: smoking congenital heart disease dehydration \u2013 for example, from severe diarrhoea low blood oxygen levels (hypoxia) pulmonary fibrosis \u2013 a lung condition that causes scarring of the lungs Read more about the red blood cell count at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 202 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Iron deficiency anaemia Vitamin B12 and folate deficiency External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out Iron deficiency anaemia Find out what iron deficiency anaemia is, what causes it, and how it's treated NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Red eye","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/red-eye","content":"Red eye - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Red eye  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Red eye   A red eye can be alarming, but is often just a sign of a minor eye condition, such as conjunctivitis or a burst blood vessel. If it's painful, there may be a more serious problem.  See your GP for advice if your red eye doesn't start to improve after a few days. Contact your GP or NHS 111 immediately, or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department, if: you have a painful red eye you have other symptoms, including reduced vision, sensitivity to light, a severe headache and feeling sick you recently injured your eye \u2013 particularly if something has pierced your eye This page aims to give you a better idea of what might be causing your red eye. However, it shouldn't be used to self-diagnose your condition. Always see a doctor for a proper diagnosis and treatment. Common causes of a painless red eye The most likely causes of a painless red eye are minor problems such as conjunctivitis or a burst blood vessel. These conditions don't tend to affect your vision and normally get better within a week or two. Conjunctivitis Conjunctivitis is inflammation (swelling and irritation) of the conjunctiva \u2013 the thin layer of tissue covering the eyeball and inner surfaces of the eyelids. This causes the blood vessels on the eye to swell, making one or both eyes look bloodshot and feel gritty. Other symptoms can include itchiness and watering of the eyes, and a sticky coating on the eyelashes. Conjunctivitis can be caused by an infection, an allergy (for example, to pollen), or an irritant, such as chlorine or dust. Treatment will depend on what is causing the condition. Sometimes no treatment is needed, because it may get better on its own.  Your doctor may recommend: regularly cleaning away any crusting or discharge not wearing contact lenses until the condition passes washing your hands regularly and avoiding sharing pillows or towels to help prevent the condition spreading to others (if it's infectious) antibiotic eye drops for bacterial infections or medications, such as antihistamines for allergies Read more about treating conjunctivitis. Burst blood vessel in the eye Straining, coughing or injuring your eye can sometimes cause a blood vessel to burst on the eye surface, causing a bright red blotch. This is called a subconjunctival haemorrhage. It can look alarming, especially if you're taking medication such as aspirin or warfarin (these reduce the blood's ability to clot, which can exaggerate the redness), but it's not usually serious and should clear up on its own within a few weeks. Common causes of a painful red eye If your red eye is painful or you have other symptoms such as reduced vision, the cause is likely to be one of the below conditions. These conditions can sometimes be serious and could threaten your sight, so they should be assessed by a doctor as soon as possible. Iritis  Iritis is inflammation of the iris (the coloured part of the eye). It's also known as anterior uveitis. As well as a red eye, you may notice that your eye is sensitive to light, your vision is blurred and you have a headache. Often, no cause is identified, although iritis can sometimes be caused by an underlying problem with the immune system or an infection. Iritis usually responds quickly to treatment with steroid medication to reduce the inflammation. It rarely leads to severe problems. Acute glaucoma Acute glaucoma is a serious condition where there is a sudden increase in pressure inside your eye. Your eye will probably be severely red and painful, and you may feel sick and see halos around lights. Your vision may be blurred or cloudy. If your GP thinks you may have acute glaucoma, they will refer you to an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) immediately, because the condition could potentially lead to permanent loss of vision if it's not treated quickly. Corneal ulcer (ulcer on the cornea) An ulcer on the cornea (the clear outer layer at the front of the eyeball) is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection. It can cause the eye to become red and sensitive to light, and it can feel like there's something in your eye. Bacterial corneal ulcers are usually seen in people who wear contact lenses. Viral corneal ulcers are often seen in people who frequently get cold sores. If your GP thinks you have a corneal ulcer, they will refer you to an eye specialist for treatment. A scratch to the cornea or particle in the eye A red and painful eye can sometimes be caused by a particle, such as a piece of grit, getting in your eye. If there's something in your eye, your GP or a hospital doctor at an accident and emergency (A&E) department will try to remove it. They will first put anaesthetic eye drops into your eye to numb it and reduce any pain. If the particle has scratched your eye, it may feel a bit uncomfortable when the anaesthetic eye drops have worn off. You may be given antibiotic eye drops or ointment to use for a few days to reduce the risk of infection while it heals. Read more about eye injuries. Page last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 965 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 476  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 293  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Conjunctivitis Eye health Eye injuries Glaucoma Uveitis External links The Eyecare Trust Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Reflux","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Gastroesophageal-reflux-disease","content":"Heartburn and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Heartburn and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Gastroesophageal-reflux-disease Clinical trials Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease Gastroesophageal-reflux-disease Symptoms Gastroesophageal-reflux-disease Causes Gastroesophageal-reflux-disease Diagnosis Gastroesophageal-reflux-disease Treatment Gastroesophageal-reflux-disease Complications Introduction   Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) is a common condition, where acid from the stomach leaks up into the oesophagus (gullet). It usually occurs as a result of the ring of muscle at the bottom of the oesophagus becoming weakened. Read more about the causes of GORD. GORD causes symptoms such as heartburn and an unpleasant taste in the back of the mouth. It may just be an occasional nuisance for some people, but for others it can be a severe, lifelong problem. GORD can often be controlled with self-help measures and medication. Occasionally, surgery to correct the problem may be needed. This topic focuses on GORD in adults. There are separate topics on reflux in babies and heartburn in pregnancy. This page covers: Symptoms of GORD What to do if you have GORD When to see your GP Treatments for GORD Complications of GORD Symptoms of GORD Symptoms of GORD can include: heartburn (an uncomfortable burning sensation in the chest that often occurs after eating) acid reflux (where stomach acid comes back up into your mouth and causes an unpleasant, sour taste) oesophagitis (a sore, inflamed oesophagus) bad breath bloating and belching feeling or being sick pain when swallowing and\/or difficulty swallowing Read more about the symptoms of GORD. What to do if you have GORD You can often control the symptoms of GORD by making some lifestyle changes and taking over-the-counter medication. See treatments for GORD for more information. You don't necessarily need to see your GP if you only have symptoms occasionally. Ask your pharmacist for advice on treatments.  When to see your GP Visit your GP if you're worried about your symptoms, or if: you have symptoms several times a week over-the-counter medications aren't helping your symptoms are severe you have difficulty swallowing you have possible signs of a more serious problem, such as persistent vomiting, vomiting blood or unexplained weight loss Your GP will usually be able to diagnose GORD based on your symptoms, although they may refer you for some tests. Read more about diagnosing GORD. Treatments for GORD The main treatments for GORD are: self-help measures \u2013 this includes eating smaller but more frequent meals, avoiding any foods or drinks that trigger your symptoms, raising the head of your bed, and keeping to a healthy weight over-the-counter medicines \u2013 ask your pharmacist to recommend an antacid or an alginate stronger prescription medicines \u2013 including proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) and H2-receptor antagonists (H2RAs) You may only need to take medication when you experience symptoms, although long-term treatment may be needed if the problem continues. Surgery to stop stomach acid leaking into your oesophagus may be recommended if medication isn't helping, or you don't want to take medication on a long-term basis. Read more about the treatments for GORD. Complications of GORD If you have GORD for a long time, stomach acid can damage your oesophagus and cause further problems. These include: ulcers (sores) on the oesophagus \u2013 these may bleed and make swallowing painful the oesophagus becoming scarred and narrowed \u2013 this can make swallowing difficult and may require an operation to correct it changes in the cells lining the oesophagus (Barrett's oesophagus) \u2013 very occasionally, oesophageal cancer can develop from these cells, so you may need to be closely monitored Read more about the complications of GORD. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/03\/2016 Next review due: 02\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1153 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 495  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 367  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Indigestion and heartburn in pregnancy Reflux in babies Indigestion Hiatus hernia Digestive health External links Barrett's Oesophagus Campaign Core: digestive disorders charity Macmillan: Barrett's oesophagus Indigestion in pregnancy How to avoid and treat heartburn in pregnancy safely Eat right for your digestion How to eat and drink to ensure good digestion, including the foods to avoid and which ones to fill up on Find and choose services for Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Reflux in babies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/reflux-babies","content":"Reflux in babies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Reflux in babies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Reflux in babies Introduction  Babies often bring up milk during or shortly after feeding \u2013 this is known as 'possetting', or 'reflux'. This is different to vomiting, where the baby's muscles forcefully contract (vomiting in babies is covered separately). Reflux is just your baby passively \"spitting up\" whatever they have just swallowed. However, it can still be upsetting to parents, and it's natural to be worried that something is wrong. It's important know that reflux is normal, and often just the result of a baby's underdeveloped oesophagus (food canal). It usually stops when the baby reaches 12-14 months of age, when the ring of muscle at the bottom of their oesophagus fully develops and closes off, preventing stomach contents from leaking out. It's unusual if reflux continues at 18 months. Only in a small number of cases can reflux be a sign of a more serious problem, such as gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD), a milk allergy or a blockage. This page covers: What tips can I try to help my baby's reflux? When should I see my GP? What might the problem be, in this case? How are these conditions investigated? What treatments can my doctor offer me? What tips can I try to help my baby's reflux? It should generally help to: burp your baby regularly throughout feeding avoid overfeeding your baby \u2013 don\u2019t force them to take more milk than they want (some babies prefer to feed little and often) check that the hole in your baby's teat is not too big \u2013 giving milk too quickly can cause regurgitation hold your baby upright for a period of time after feeding Bear in mind that if your baby brings up a lot of milk, they may be hungry again quite quickly. For more general advice on feeding your baby, you can read our bottle feeding advice and help for breastfeeding problems. It can also help to raise the head end of your child's cot or crib when they are sleeping \u2013 try using books under the legs of the cot or crib, or placing a pillow underneath the mattress at the head end (never put any pillows inside the cot). Your baby should still be laid down to sleep on their back. When should I see my GP? If reflux happens often, or your baby is violently sick, appears to be in pain or you're worried for any other reason, talk to your health visitor or GP \u2013 especially if they have any of the following symptoms: coughing, gagging or trouble swallowing frequent projectile vomiting persistent crying and being irritable wheezing bad breath difficulty sleeping arching their back during or after a feed drawing their legs up to their tummy after feeding refusing a feed even though they're happy to suck on a dummy or similar not gaining much weight, or losing weight What might the problem be, in this case? GORD Babies who repeatedly bring up their food after feeding may have GORD, which is a more serious, long-term form of reflux.  Normally, a ring of muscle at the bottom of the oesophagus acts like a valve, opening to let food fall into the stomach, then closing to prevent acid leaking out of the stomach. In GORD, this muscle becomes weak or relaxes when it shouldn't, and doesn't close properly. This allows the acidic stomach contents to rise up and irritate the lining of the oesophagus. GORD is more common in babies who: were born prematurely had a very low birthweight are allergic to cows' milk have a muscle or nerve disorder, such as cerebral palsy As your baby grows older, the muscle should open only when he or she swallows, and remain tightly closed at all other times to prevent stomach contents escaping. This is why most babies grow out of reflux by 18 months. An allergy  If you think your baby is having a reaction to infant formula or cows' milk, tell your GP. Some of the signs are a skin rash, vomiting and diarrhoea. Your GP can prescribe special formula feeds called \"extensively hydrolysed protein feeds\" (see When should I see my GP?). If your baby is allergic to cows' milk, eliminating it from their diet for two to three weeks should reduce their vomiting considerably. If you breastfeed, you'll need to exclude cows' milk from your own diet. Some infant formula is labelled as hypoallergenic, but this is not suitable for babies with a diagnosed cows' milk allergy. Always talk to your GP before using hypoallergenic or soya-based infant formula, as babies who are allergic to cows' milk may also be allergic to soya. If your baby continues to vomit despite cutting out cows' milk, it's unlikely that an allergy is the problem. A blockage It's rare, but possible, that your baby's reflux may be caused by a blockage in their digestive tract. Their oesophagus may be blocked or narrowed (known as an \"oesophageal stricture\"), or there may be a blockage between your baby's stomach and small intestine (known as \"pyloric stenosis\"). The following websites have more information on these rare conditions: TOFS (charity): oesophageal stricture Great Ormond Street Hospital: pyloric stenosis How are these conditions investigated? If your baby has severe symptoms, your GP may refer you to a paediatrician for further investigation (a paediatrician is a specialist in treating disorders in children). Your baby may have one or more of the following tests. An upper endoscopy An endoscopy is a procedure where the inside of the body is examined using an endoscope \u2013 a long, thin, flexible tube that has a light source and a video camera at one end. Your baby may need an upper endoscopy (examination of their oesophagus and stomach) if they continue to have problems, despite feeding changes and medication. The endoscope will be carefully fed through your baby's mouth and down their oesophagus after they've been sedated and given extra oxygen. An instrument on the end of the endoscope can be used to take a biopsy (tissue sample) of the oesophagus. This will be sent to a laboratory and examined to see if there's any inflammation. Read more about an endoscopy. Impedance-pH monitoring of the oesophagus Impedance-pH monitoring measures the amount of liquid and acid in your baby's oesophagus. It is carried out in hospital, by a paediatrician, as part of an upper endoscopy. A thin tube will be passed through your baby's nose or mouth to their stomach while they are awake. It is taped to your baby's cheek, where it remains for 24 hours.  The end of the tube has sensors to detect when and how much acid or liquid travels up into your baby's oesophagus. The other end is attached to a monitor outside your baby's body, which shows the measurements taken. Barium swallow test A barium swallow test, sometimes called an \"upper GI series\", can identify blockages or problems with the muscles used during swallowing. It's used to rule out an abnormality with your baby's oesophagus. Your baby will rest in front of an X-ray machine and drink a barium solution from a bottle. An X-ray will be taken, and the barium will coat the inside of your baby's digestive tract, showing its shape. What treatments can my doctor offer me? GORD Treatment for babies and toddlers with mild symptoms of GORD isn't always needed, because they often grow out of the condition after a few months. In the past, health professionals would recommend adding a thickener (such as cereal) to breast milk or formula feed to make it stickier and heavier \u2013 which, in theory, would make it more likely to stay in the baby's stomach. However, there's no scientific evidence to support this, so thickeners don't tend to be recommended nowadays. If you wish to try this, seek your GP's advice first. Your GP may recommend an anti-regurgitation formula, or an antacid combined with another medicine called an alginate. Alginates form a foam barrier that floats on the surface of the stomach's contents, and should help the milk stay in your baby's stomach. Reaction to cows' milk If your baby is diagnosed with a cows' milk allergy, your GP can prescribe a different type of infant formula known as extensively or fully hydrolysed formula. This means that: the milk proteins are broken down into smaller parts, making them easier to digest it's much less likely that the cows' milk protein will cause an allergy Many children outgrow their milk allergies. Medication  Medicines are rarely needed for reflux in babies, and their benefits are uncertain. However, if your baby's feeding problems are unexplained, or your baby is not gaining much weight or is distressed, you may be referred to a paediatrician, who may suggest a trial of medication \u2013 either ranitidine or omeprazole \u2013 to reduce the amount of acid their stomach produces.  For more information, read about ranitidine for children and omeprazole for children (links to external site). Why else could my baby be crying? Reflux can make your baby irritable and upset \u2013 but consider whether your baby may be crying for another reason, such as: hunger a dirty or wet nappy tiredness wanting a cuddle wind being too hot or too cold boredom overstimulation Learn more about crying in babies, including getting help for excessive crying. Page last reviewed: 16\/10\/2014 Next review due: 16\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 53 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Lifestyle and breastfeeding Infant formula: common questions Food allergies in children External links Cry-sis Living with Reflux Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Breastfeeding a premature baby Why breast milk is important for your premature baby, how to express breast milk, and tips on breastfeeding directly from the breast NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Reiter's syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Reactive-arthritis","content":"Reactive arthritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Reactive arthritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Reactive-arthritis Clinical trials Reactive arthritis Reactive-arthritis Symptoms Reactive-arthritis Causes Reactive-arthritis Treatment Introduction   Reactive arthritis, formerly known as Reiter's syndrome, is a condition that causes inflammation (redness and swelling) in various places in the body. It usually develops following an infection, and in most cases clears up in a few months without causing long-term problems. The three most common places affected by reactive arthritis are: the joints (arthritis), which can cause pain, stiffness and swelling the eyes (conjunctivitis), which can cause eye pain and redness the urethra (non-gonococcal urethritis), which can cause pain when urinating (the urethra is the tube that carries urine out of the body)  However, most people will not experience all of these problems.  Read more about the symptoms of reactive arthritis. What causes reactive arthritis? Reactive arthritis usually develops within four weeks of an infection, typically after a sexually transmitted infection (STI) such as chlamydia, or an infection of the bowel. For reasons that are still unclear, the immune system (the body's defence against infection) appears to malfunction in response to the infection and starts attacking healthy tissue, causing it to become inflamed. Read more about the causes of reactive arthritis. Seeking medical advice See your GP if you have swollen and painful joints, especially if you have recently had symptoms of an infection such as diarrhoea or pain when passing urine. There is no single test for reactive arthritis, although blood and urine tests, genital swabs and X-rays may be used to check for infection and rule out other causes of your symptoms. Your GP will also want to know about your recent medical history, such as whether you may have recently had a bowel infection or an STI. How reactive arthritis is treated There is currently no cure for reactive arthritis, but most people get better in around six months. Meanwhile, treatment can help to relieve symptoms such as pain and stiffness. Symptoms can often be controlled using non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and painkillers such as ibuprofen. Severe symptoms may require more powerful steroid medication (corticosteroids) or disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs). Read more about treating reactive arthritis. Who is affected Reactive arthritis can occur at any age, but it most commonly affects young adults aged 20-40. Men are generally affected more than woman \u2013 particularly in cases linked to STIs, which are estimated to be about 10 times more common in men. People who have a certain gene called HLA-B27, which is found in around one in every 10 people in the UK, are about thought to be around 50 times more likely to develop reactive arthritis than those who don't have this gene. Preventing reactive arthritis The most effective way to reduce your risk of reactive arthritis is to avoid the STIs and bowel infections that most commonly cause the condition. The most effective way of preventing STIs is to always use a barrier method of contraception, such as a condom, during sex with a new partner.  Read advice on STIs, contraception and sexual health. Ensuring good standards of hygiene when preparing and storing food can help to prevent gastrointestinal infections. Read about food safety and preventing food poisoning. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/01\/2015 Next review due: 08\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 108 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Conjunctivitis Joint pain STIs Urethritis External links Arthritis Care: reactive arthritis Arthritis Research UK: reactive arthritis The Pain Toolkit Pain Concern Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Symptoms to look out for, where to go for help and how to protect yourself. Plus, real-life stories from people with infections How to prepare and cook food safely How to prepare and cook food correctly to reduce the risk of food poisoning, including E. coli NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Renal transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/kidney-transplant","content":"Kidney transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Kidney transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Kidney-transplant Real stories Kidney-transplant Clinical trials Kidney-transplant Community Kidney transplant Kidney-transplant Waiting list Kidney-transplant What happens Kidney-transplant Living with Kidney-transplant Risks Kidney-transplant Donation Introduction  A kidney transplant is the transfer of a healthy kidney from one person into the body of a person who has little or no kidney function.  The main role of the kidneys is to filter waste products from the blood and convert them to urine. If the kidneys lose this ability, waste products can build up, which is potentially life-threatening. This loss of kidney function, known as end-stage chronic kidney disease or kidney failure, is the most common reason for needing a kidney transplant. It's possible to partially replicate the functions of the kidney using a blood filtering procedure known as dialysis. However, this can be inconvenient and time-consuming, so a kidney transplant is the treatment of choice for kidney failure whenever possible. Who can have a kidney transplant? Most people who need a kidney transplant are able to have one, regardless of their age, as long as: they're well enough to withstand the effects of surgery the transplant has a relatively good chance of success the person is willing to comply with the recommended treatments required after the transplant \u2013 such as taking immunosuppressant medication and attending regular follow-up appointments Reasons why it may not be safe or effective to perform a transplant include having an ongoing infection (this will need to be treated first), severe heart disease, cancer that has spread to several places in your body, or AIDS. Around one in three people with kidney failure is suitable for a transplant. Kidney donations Unlike many other types of organ donation, it's possible to donate a kidney while you're alive because you only need one kidney to survive. This is known as a living donation. People who want to be considered as a kidney donor are tested very carefully to ensure they are a suitable donor and are fit for the operation needed to remove a kidney. Ideally, living donations will come from a close relative because they are more likely to share the same tissue type and blood group as the recipient, which reduces the risk of the body rejecting the kidney. Kidney donations are also possible from people who have recently died. This is known as deceased kidney donation. However, this type of kidney donation has a slightly lower chance of long-term success. Read more about donating a kidney. Waiting for a kidney People who need a kidney transplant, but don't have a suitable living donor, will have to wait until a suitable deceased donor kidney becomes available. On average, the waiting time for a deceased donor kidney transplant is two to three years. Waiting times are so long because the demand for donated kidneys in the UK is far higher than the available supply of donors. From April 2014 to April 2015, around 3,000 kidney transplants were carried out in the UK, but there were still more than 5,000 people on the waiting list for a kidney by the end of this period. Kidney donors are particularly required from people of non-white ethnic origin, because rates of kidney disease are especially high in people of South Asian, African and Caribbean ethnic origin. However, there are not many donors from these communities. Read more about the kidney transplant waiting list. The transplant procedure If you receive a kidney from a living donor, this will be a carefully planned operation. If you're waiting for a deceased donor kidney, the transplant centre will contact you when a suitable kidney becomes available. This can happen at any time of the day or night. Staff at the centre will check you don't have any new medical problems and will ask you to go to the centre, where final checks will be performed to be sure the transplant should go ahead. You'll then have surgery to insert the new kidney and connect it to your blood vessels and bladder. The new kidney will be placed in the lower part of your abdomen (tummy). Your own kidneys will usually be left in place. A kidney transplant is a major surgical procedure with a wide range of potential risks. In the short term, these risks include blood clots and infection. Longer-term problems, which include diabetes and an increased risk of infections, are usually related to the medication you need to take to reduce the chance of rejection. Because of the risk of further problems, people who have had a kidney transplant require regular check-ups for the rest of their life. Read more about what happens during a kidney transplant and the risks of a kidney transplant. Living with a kidney transplant Having a healthy lifestyle after a kidney transplant goes a long way to minimise the risk of complications. Therefore, it\u2019s recommended that you: stop smoking if you smoke eat a healthy diet lose weight if you are overweight or obese take steps to reduce your risk of developing infections Read more about living with a transplant. How long do kidney transplants last? There are a number of factors which affect how long a transplanted kidney lasts. These include whether or not the kidney came from a living donor, how well the kidney is matched in terms of blood group and tissue type, and the age and overall health of the person receiving the donation. Overall, average kidney survival times are: 1 year \u2013 about 95% 5 years \u2013 about 85-90% 10 years \u2013 about 75% If you have a kidney transplant that fails, you can usually be put on the waiting list for another transplant. You may need dialysis in the meantime. The NHS Organ Donor Register In the UK, consent is required before organs can be donated. A person can give their consent to become an organ donor after death by joining the NHS Organ Donor Register or by discussing their wishes with loved ones. Alternatively, a person's organs can be donated if consent is obtained after their death from an authorised person, such as a relative or friend. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick and simple, and will only take a few minutes of your time. You can remove yourself from the register at any time, and you can specify what you're willing to donate. Read more about organ donation. Page last reviewed: 14\/10\/2015 Next review due: 14\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 233 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 146  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Kidney transplant: Tony's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Tony talks about his recovery from a kidney transplant and his goal of climbing Mount Everest. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Dialysis Find kidney disease services Kidney disease Kidney health Organ donation External links British Kidney Patient Association (BKPA) Kidney Patient Guide Kidney Research UK Kidney Transplant Decision Aid National Kidney Federation NHS Organ Donation BBC newsreader donates kidney to save mother BBC news presenter Sabet Choudhury talks about his decision to donate a kidney to save his mother's life Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register Community content from HealthUnlocked Find kidney disease information and support services Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Repair to tendon (hand)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tendonhand","content":"Hand tendon repair - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hand tendon repair  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Hand tendon repair tendonhand How it's performed tendonhand Recovery tendonhand Complications Introduction  If any of the tendons in your hand are damaged, surgery may be needed to repair them and help restore movement in the affected fingers or thumb. What are tendons? Tendons are tough cords of tissue that connect muscles to bones. When a group of muscles contract (tighten), the attached tendons will pull on certain bones, allowing you to make a wide range of movements. There are two groups of tendons in the hand: extensor tendons \u2013 which run from the forearm, across the back of your hand to your fingers and thumb, allowing you to straighten your fingers and thumb flexor tendons \u2013 which run from your forearm, through your wrist and across the palm of your hand, allowing you to bend your fingers Surgery can often be carried out to repair damage to both these groups of tendons. When hand tendon repair is needed Hand tendon repair is carried out when one or more tendons in your hand rupture or are cut, leading to loss of normal hand movements. If your extensor tendons are damaged, you'll be unable to straighten one or more fingers. If your flexor tendons are damaged, you'll be unable to bend one or more fingers. Tendon damage can also cause pain and inflammation (swelling) in your hand. In some cases, damage to the extensor tendons can be treated without the need for surgery, using a rigid support called a splint that\u2019s worn around the hand. Common causes of tendon injuries include: cuts \u2013 cuts across the back or palm of your hand can result in injury to your tendons  sports injuries \u2013 extensor tendons can rupture when stubbing a finger, such as trying to catch a ball; flexor tendons can occasionally be pulled off the bone when grabbing an opponent's jersey, such as in rugby; and the pulleys holding flexor tendons can rupture during activities that involve lots of strenuous gripping, such as rock climbing bites \u2013 animal and human bites can cause tendon damage, and a person may damage their hand tendon after punching another person in the teeth crushing injuries \u2013 jamming a finger in a door or crushing the hand in a car accident can divide or rupture a tendon  rheumatoid arthritis \u2013 rheumatoid arthritis can cause tendons to become inflamed, which in severe cases can lead to tendons rupturing Tendon repair surgery Tendon repair may involve the surgeon making an incision in your wrist, hand or finger so they can locate the ends of the divided tendon and stitch them together. Extensor tendons are easier to reach, so repairing them is relatively straightforward. Depending on the type of injury, it may be possible to repair extensor tendons in an accident and emergency (A&E) department using a local anaesthetic to numb the affected area. Repairing flexor tendons is more challenging because the flexor tendon system is more complex. Flexor tendon repair usually needs to be carried out under either general anaesthetic or regional anaesthetic (where the whole arm is numbed) in an operating theatre by an experienced plastic or orthopaedic surgeon who specialises in hand surgery. Read more about how hand tendon repair is performed. Recovering from surgery Both types of tendon surgery require a lengthy period of recovery (rehabilitation) because the repaired tendons will be weak until the ends heal together. Depending on the location of the injury, it can take up to three months for the repaired tendon to regain its previous strength. Rehabilitation involves protecting your tendons from overuse using a hand splint. You'll usually need to wear a hand splint for several weeks after surgery. You'll also need to perform hand exercises regularly during your recovery to stop the repaired tendons sticking to nearby tissue, which can prevent you from being able to fully move your hand. When you can return to work will depend on your job. Light activities can often be resumed after 6-8 weeks and heavy activities and sport after 10-12 weeks. Read more about recovering from hand tendon repair. Results After an extensor tendon repair you should have a working finger or thumb, but you may not regain full movement. The outcome is often better when the injury is a clean cut to the tendon, rather than one that involves crushing or damage to the bones and joints. A flexor tendon injury is generally more serious because they're often put under more strain than extensor tendons. After a flexor tendon repair, it's quite common for some fingers to not regain full movement. However, the tendon repair will still give a better result than not having surgery. In some cases, complications develop after surgery, such as infection or the repaired tendon snapping or sticking to nearby tissue. In these circumstances, further treatment may be required. Read more about the complications of hand tendon repair. Page last reviewed: 07\/07\/2015 Next review due: 07\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 153 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links First aid Having an operation Human and animal bites Rheumatoid arthritis Sports injuries Trigger finger External links BSSH: hand surgery Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Questions about surgery It's important to know the details of any operation you're going to have. Find out what you should ask before having surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Repetitive strain injury (RSI)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Repetitive-strain-injury","content":"Repetitive strain injury (RSI) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Repetitive strain injury (RSI)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Repetitive-strain-injury Clinical trials Repetitive strain injury Repetitive-strain-injury Diagnosis Repetitive-strain-injury Treatment Introduction  Repetitive strain injury (RSI) is a general term used to describe the pain felt in muscles, nerves and tendons caused by repetitive movement and overuse. It's also known as work-related upper limb disorder, or non-specific upper limb pain. The condition mostly affects parts of the upper body, such as the: forearms and elbows wrists and hands neck and shoulders Symptoms of RSI The symptoms of RSI can range from mild to severe and usually develop gradually. They often include: pain, aching or tenderness stiffness throbbing tingling or numbness weakness cramp At first, you might only notice symptoms when you're carrying out a particular repetitive action. But without treatment, the symptoms of RSI may eventually become constant and cause longer periods of pain. You may also get swelling in the affected area, which can last for several months. What to do if you think you have RSI If you develop symptoms of RSI and think it may be related to your job, speak to your employer or occupational health representative. It may be possible to modify your tasks to improve your symptoms.  See your GP if symptoms continue, despite attempts to change how you work. Read more about diagnosing RSI. What causes RSI? RSI is related to the overuse of muscles and tendons in the upper body. Certain things are thought to increase the risk of RSI, including: repetitive activities doing a high-intensity activity for a long time without rest poor posture or activities that require you to work in an awkward position Cold temperatures and vibrating equipment are also thought to increase the risk of getting RSI and can make the symptoms worse. Stress can also be a contributing factor. A variety of jobs can lead to RSI, such as working at an assembly line, at a supermarket checkout or typing at a computer. It's important to work in a comfortable environment which has been appropriately adjusted. Your employer has a legal duty to try to prevent work-related RSI and ensure anyone who already has the condition doesn't get any worse. Read more about workplace health. How RSI is treated The first step in treating RSI is usually to identify and modify the task or activity that is causing the symptoms. If necessary, you may need to stop doing the activity altogether. To relieve symptoms, your GP may advise taking a course of anti-inflammatory painkillers (such as aspirin or ibuprofen), or using a heat or cold pack, elastic support or splint. You may also be referred to a physiotherapist for advice on posture and how to strengthen or relax your muscles. Some people find that other types of therapy help to relieve symptoms, including massage, yoga and osteopathy. Read more about treating RSI. How to prevent RSI Most employers carry out a risk assessment when you join a company to check that your work area is suitable and comfortable for you. You can request an assessment if you haven't had one. There are also things you can do to help reduce your risk of RSI, such as: maintaining good posture at work \u2013 see how to sit at a desk correctly  taking regular breaks from long or repetitive tasks \u2013 it's better to take smaller, more frequent breaks than one long lunch break trying relaxation techniques if you're stressed If you work at a computer all day, make sure your seat, keyboard, mouse and screen are positioned so they cause the least amount of strain. See tips on preventing RSI for more detailed advice about using a mouse and keyboard at work. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1414 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 387  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 753  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Healthy back at work Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Trevor Shaw, principal ergonomist, explains how bad posture contributes to health problems including back pain. He describes how to improve your health at work. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Carpal tunnel syndrome Physiotherapy Tendonitis External links Health and Safety Executive Workplace health Improve your health at work, with tips on dealing with stress, RSI, back pain, exercise and healthy lunches Tips to prevent RSI Prevent repetitive strain injury (RSI), with tips on relaxation, checking your workstation, and adjusting your computer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Research and clinical trials","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Clinical-trials","content":"Clinical trials - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Clinical trials  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Clinical-trials Real stories Clinical-trials Search trials Clinical trials and medical research   A clinical trial compares the effects of one treatment with another. It may involve patients, healthy people, or both. How do I take part in a clinical trial? Why join a clinical trial? Will I get paid? What happens in a clinical trial? What should I know before I sign up? How are trials regulated and judged ethical? How are trial results used to improve treatment? Where can I find results from trials that are relevant to me?  How do I take part in a clinical trial? You can ask your doctor or a patient organisation if they know of any clinical trials that you may be eligible to join. You can also search for information on a number of websites and register your interest in taking part in research. The main ones are described below. UK Clinical Trials Gateway The UK Clinical Trials Gateway (UKCTG) website pulls through information about clinical trials and other research from several different UK registers. If you sign up to it, researchers can contact you about research that might be suitable for you.  You can also search the UKCTG site in various ways to find trials relevant to you, and you can contact researchers yourself. WHO International Clinical Trials The World Health Organization's Clinical Trials Search Portal provides access to clinical trials in countries all around the world. Charities For some conditions, you can find out about clinical trials from the websites of charities. Examples are: Arthritis Research UK: current clinical trials and studies Cancer Research UK: find a clinical trial   Multiple Sclerosis Society: MS clinical trials     Target Ovarian Cancer: clinical trials information centre Why join a clinical trial? Clinical trials help doctors understand how to treat a particular disease or condition. It may benefit you, or others like you, in the future. If you take part in a clinical trial, you may be one of the first people to benefit from a new treatment. However, there is also a chance that the new treatment turns out to be no better, or worse, than the standard treatment. To hear other people's experiences of taking part in a clinical trial, visit healthtalk.org: clinical trials. Will I get paid? Some clinical trials offer payment, which can vary from hundreds to thousands of pounds depending on what is involved and expected from you. Some trials don't offer payment and just cover your travel expenses. It's important to find out about the inconvenience and risks involved before you sign up, and to carefully weigh up whether it is worth it. Bear in mind: it can be time consuming \u2013 you may be expected to attend a number of screening and follow-up sessions, and some trials require you to stay overnight there may be restrictions on what you can and cannot do \u2013 for example, you may be asked to not eat or drink alcohol for a period of time you may experience unknown side effects from the treatment What happens in a clinical trial? Testing a new medicine All clinical trials of new medicines go through a series of phases to test whether they are safe and whether they work. The medicines will usually be tested against another treatment called a control. This will either be a dummy treatment (a placebo) or a standard treatment already in use. Learn more about the placebo effect. Phase one trials: A small number of people, who may be healthy volunteers, are given the medicine. The drug is being trialled in human volunteers for the first time. Researchers test for side effects and calculate what the right dose might be to use in treatment. Researchers start with small doses and only increase the dose if the volunteers don't experience any side effects, or if they only experience minor side effects. Phase two trials: The new medicine is tested on a larger group of people who are ill. This is to get a better idea of its effects in the short term. Phase three trials: Carried out on medicines that have passed phases one and two. The medicine is tested in larger groups of people who are ill, and compared against an existing treatment or a placebo to see if it's better in practice and if it has important side effects. Trials often last a year or more and involve several thousand patients. Phase four trials: The safety, side effects and effectiveness of the medicine continue to be studied while it is being used in practice. Not required for every medicine. Only carried out on medicines that have passed all the previous stages and have been given marketing licences \u2013 a licence means the medicine can be made available on prescription. Control groups, randomisation and blinding If you take part in a clinical trial, you will usually be randomly assigned to either the: treatment group \u2013 where you'll be given the treatment being assessed, or  control group \u2013 where you'll be given an existing standard treatment, or a placebo if no proven standard treatment exists While the treatments are different in the two groups, researchers try to keep as many of the other conditions the same as possible. For example, both groups should have people of a similar age, with a similar proportion of men and women, who are in similar overall health. In most trials, a computer will be used to randomly decide which group each patient will be allocated to. Many trials are set up so nobody knows who's been allocated to receive which treatment. This is known as blinding, and it helps reduce the effects of bias when comparing the outcomes of the treatments. What should I know before I sign up? When you express interest in a trial, a doctor or nurse is likely to tell you something about it in person. You'll also be given some printed information to take away. You may come back with some questions you feel haven't been answered. General questions What is the aim of the trial and how will it help people? Who is funding the trial? What treatment will I get if I do not take part in the trial? How long is the trial expected to last, and how long will I have to take part? How long will it be before the results of the trial are known? What will happen if I stop the trial treatment or leave the trial before it ends? What would happen if something went wrong? It's rare for patients to be harmed by trial treatments, but you may want to ask about compensation if this were to happen. Practical questions How much of my time will be needed? Will I need to take time off work? Will I be paid? Will the costs of my travel to take part in the trial be covered? If the trial is testing a new drug, will I have to collect it from the hospital, will it be sent to me by post, or will I get it through my doctor? Will I have to complete questionnaires or keep a diary? What are the possible side effects of my treatment? How could the treatments affect me physically and emotionally? Who can I contact if I have a problem? Will someone be available 24 hours a day? How do I find out the results of the trial? Things to weigh up As with any treatment, you can't be sure of the outcome. You may be given a new treatment that turns out not to be as effective as the standard treatment. Also, it's possible you'll experience unexpected side effects. And bear in mind that you may have to visit your place of treatment more often, or have more tests, treatments or monitoring, than you would if you were receiving the standard treatment in usual care. Leaving a trial You may decide to stop taking part in a trial if your condition is getting worse or if you feel the treatment isn't helping you. You can also choose to leave at any point without giving a reason and without it affecting the care you receive. Results At the end of the trial, the researchers should publish the results and make them available to anyone who took part and wanted to know the results. If the researchers don't offer you the results and you want to know, ask for them. Some research funders, such as the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), have websites where they publish the results of the research they have supported. How are trials regulated and judged ethical? Role of the MHRA Before a clinical trial of a new medicine can begin, a government agency called the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) needs to review and authorise it. The MHRA inspects sites where trials take place to make sure they're conducted in line with good clinical practice. Role of the HRA The Health Research Authority (HRA) works to protect and promote the interests of patients and the public in health research. It is responsible for research ethics committees up and down the country.  All medical research involving people in the UK, whether in the NHS or the private sector, first has to be approved by an independent research ethics committee. The committee protects the rights and interests of the people who will be in the trial. How are trial results used to improve treatment? Clinical trials can help: prevent illnesses by testing a vaccine detect or diagnose illnesses by testing a scan or blood test treat illnesses by testing new or existing medicines find out how best to provide psychological support  find out how people can control their symptoms or improve their quality of life \u2013 for example, by testing how a particular diet affects a condition Many clinical trials are designed to show whether new medicines work as expected. These results are sent to the MHRA, which decides whether to allow the company making the medicine to market it for a particular use. Licensing a treatment If research has identified a new medicine, the MHRA must license it before it can be marketed. Licensing shows a treatment has met certain standards of safety and effectiveness. Safety must be monitored carefully over the first few years of a newly licensed treatment. This is because rare side effects that weren't obvious in clinical trials may show up for the first time. In England and Wales, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) decides whether the NHS should provide treatments. Where can I find results from trials that are relevant to me? The results of clinical trials are usually published in specialist medical journals and online libraries of evidence. Some of the most well-known examples are: The Lancet medical journal British Medical Journal (BMJ) The New England Journal of Medicine Cochrane Library \u2013 a collection of high-quality evidence NHS Evidence database You can use a search engine such as Google to look for articles and read summaries (abstracts). But you can't usually see the full articles without a subscription to the journal. Also, research papers are not written in plain English and often use many medical, scientific and statistical terms. They can be very difficult to understand. Coverage in newspapers You'll often see stories about research findings in mainstream media. But while news stories are easier to read than original research papers, sometimes the findings are exaggerated or sensationalised. The NHS website aims to make this clearer for you. Behind the Headlines is an independent service that analyses health stories that make the news.  It aims to explain the facts behind the headlines and give a better understanding of the research that was carried out. How do clinical trials work? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, Dr Ben Goldacre explains why clinical trials are important, what they involve and who can take part in one. He also describes common concerns patients might have and gives tips on what questions to ask before taking part in any research. Media last reviewed: 20\/01\/2016 Next review due: 20\/01\/2018 Page last reviewed: 15\/06\/2016 Next review due: 15\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 305 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 177  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful UK Clinical Trials Gateway Search for clinical trials and find out how you can take part in health research    Useful links NHS Choices links Health regulators Medicines information Prostate cancer trials External links Association of British Healthcare Industries (ABHI) Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI) Association of Medical Research Charities (AMRC) Cancer Research UK: cancer trials Database of Uncertainties about the Effects of Treatments (DUETs) Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) Europe PubMed Central healthtalk.org: clinical trials Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) James Lind Alliance (JLA) Medical Research Council (MRC) Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) NHS Health Research Authority (HRA) National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Testing Treatments interactive (TTi) Understanding Animal Research UK Clinical Research Collaboration (UKCRC) Community content from HealthUnlocked About health records Find out about the different types of medical records in the NHS and what they're used for NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Respiratory distress syndrome, Acute","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/acute-respiratory-distress-syndrome","content":"Acute respiratory distress syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Acute respiratory distress syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview acute-respiratory-distress-syndrome Clinical trials Acute respiratory distress syndrome Introduction  Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a life-threatening medical condition where the lungs can't provide enough oxygen for the rest of the body. ARDS can affect people of any age and usually develops as a complication of a serious existing health condition. Consequently, most people have already been admitted to hospital by the time the symptoms of ARDS begin. Symptoms of ARDS can include: severe shortness of breath rapid, shallow breathing tiredness, drowsiness or confusion feeling faint Medical emergency Although most cases of ARDS begin in hospital, this isn't always the case. For example, the condition may develop quickly as a result of an infection such as pneumonia, or if someone accidentally inhales their vomit. Dial 999 immediately to request an ambulance if you notice any breathing problems in a child or adult. What causes ARDS? ARDS develops if the lungs become severely inflamed as a result of an infection or injury. The inflammation causes fluid from nearby blood vessels to leak into the tiny air sacs in your lungs, making breathing increasingly difficult. The lungs may become inflamed following: pneumonia or severe flu blood poisoning (sepsis) a severe chest injury   accidental inhalation of vomit, smoke or toxic chemicals near drowning acute pancreatitis \u2013 a serious condition where the pancreas becomes inflamed over a short period of time  an adverse reaction to a blood transfusion How ARDS is diagnosed There's no specific test to diagnose ARDS. A full assessment is needed to identify the underlying cause and rule out other conditions. This assessment is likely to include: a physical examination blood tests \u2013 to measure the amount of oxygen in the blood and check for an infection a pulse oximetry test \u2013 where a sensor attached to the fingertip, ear or toe is used to measure how much oxygen the blood is absorbing a chest X-ray and a computerised tomography (CT) scan \u2013 to look for evidence of ARDS an echocardiogram \u2013 a type of ultrasound scan used to create a picture of the heart Treating ARDS If someone develops ARDS, they'll probably be admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) and put on a ventilator to assist their breathing. In some cases, it may be possible to use an oxygen mask to supply oxygen. However, in severe cases of ARDS, a tube will need to be inserted down the throat and into the lungs to allow oxygen to be pumped in. Fluids and nutrients will be supplied through a tube that goes into the stomach through the nose. Read more about feeding tubes. The underlying cause of ARDS should also be treated. For example, if it's caused by a bacterial infection, antibiotics may need to be prescribed to help fight the infection. The amount of time you need to spend in hospital will depend on your individual circumstances and the cause of ARDS. Most people respond well to treatment within days, but it may be several weeks or months before someone with ARDS is well enough to leave hospital. Complications of ARDS As ARDS is often caused by a serious health condition, about one in three people who develop it will die. However, most deaths result from another problem caused by their illness, rather than ARDS itself. For people who survive, the main complications are associated with nerve and muscle damage, which causes pain and weakness. Some people also develop psychological problems, such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression. The lungs themselves usually recover and long-term (chronic) lung failure after ARDS is rare. Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS) Sometimes a newborn baby's lungs are underdeveloped and unable to provide their body with enough oxygen. This is known as neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS) and usually affects premature babies. Although the conditions have similar names, NRDS isn't related to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).   Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 18\/03\/2015 Next review due: 18\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 40 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acute pancreatitis Flu Pneumonia Sepsis External links British Lung Foundation: lung conditions Intensive care Find out about intensive care units (ICUs), specialist hospital wards for people who are seriously ill NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Respiratory distress syndrome, Neonatal","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Respiratory-distress-syndrome","content":"Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Respiratory-distress-syndrome Clinical trials Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome Respiratory-distress-syndrome Treatment Respiratory-distress-syndrome Complications Introduction  Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS) happens when a newborn baby's lungs aren't fully developed and they cannot provide enough oxygen. It usually affects premature babies.  NRDS is also known as:  hyaline membrane disease infant respiratory distress syndrome newborn respiratory distress syndrome surfactant deficiency lung disease (SDLD) Despite having a similar name, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) isn't related. ARDS is caused by a serious underlying health condition and can affect people of any age. Why it happens NRDS most often occurs when there isn't enough surfactant in the lungs. This substance, made up of proteins and fats, helps keep the lungs inflated and prevents parts of the lung called air sacs collapsing. A baby normally begins producing surfactant sometime between weeks 24 and 28 of pregnancy. Most babies produce enough surfactant to breathe normally by week 34. If your baby is born prematurely, they may not have enough surfactant in their lungs. Occasionally, NRDS occurs in babies that aren't born prematurely. This is usually caused by other risk factors, such as: the mother having diabetes the baby being underweight poor lung development, which can be caused by a variety of illnesses Problems with the genes can play a role in lung development, but this is very rare. It's estimated half of all babies born before 28 weeks of pregnancy will develop NRDS. However, this has reduced in recent years, as steroid injections can be given to mothers at risk of NRDS during premature labour. Signs and symptoms The signs of NRDS are often noticeable immediately after birth and get worse over the following few days. They can include: blue-coloured lips, fingers and toes rapid, shallow breathing flaring nostrils a grunting sound when breathing As premature babies are usually born in hospital, most babies with NRDS are already in hospital when they develop these problems and receive treatment. If you give birth outside hospital and notice the above symptoms in your child, call 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance. Diagnosing NRDS A number of tests can be used to look for the signs of NRDS and rule out other possible causes. These tests may include: a physical examination blood tests \u2013 to measure the amount of oxygen in the blood and check for an infection a pulse oximetry test \u2013 to measure how much oxygen is being absorbed in the blood, using a sensor attached to the fingertip, ear or toe a chest X-ray \u2013 to look for the distinctive cloudy appearance of NRDS Treating NRDS Most babies with NRDS need breathing help with extra oxygen and possibly some form of ventilator support. Babies needing ventilation can often be treated with a medication directly into the lungs called artificial surfactant, which helps restore normal lung function. Some cases can be prevented or at least made less severe by treating the mother with a medication called betamethasone before birth. Read more about treating NRDS. Complications In the majority of cases NRDS can be treated successfully, and deaths directly linked to NRDS are rare in the UK. However, in more severe cases there's a risk of further problems. These can include scarring to the lungs, leading to longer-term breathing problems. There's also a risk of brain damage, which may result in problems such as learning difficulties. Read more about the possible complications of NRDS. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 39 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) Pregnancy and baby guide Premature labour and birth Special care for premature babies Premature labour Sometimes labour starts early, and your baby may be born prematurely. Find out what to expect Baby special care Find out about special care for babies born early, sick, jaundiced or with a disability Find and choose services for Respiratory distress syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Respiratory tract infections","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Respiratory-tract-infection","content":"Respiratory tract infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Respiratory tract infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Respiratory-tract-infection Clinical trials Respiratory tract infection Introduction  Respiratory tract infections (RTIs) are any infection of the sinuses, throat, airways or lungs. They're usually caused by viruses, but can be caused by bacteria. RTIs are thought to be one of the main reasons why people visit their GP or pharmacist. The common cold is the most widespread RTI. Healthcare professionals generally make a distinction between: upper respiratory tract infections \u2013 which affect the nose, sinuses and throat lower respiratory tract infections \u2013 which affect the airways and lungs Children tend to get more upper RTIs than adults because they haven't built up immunity (resistance) to the many viruses that can cause these infections. How respiratory infections spread RTIs can spread in several ways. If you have an infection such as a cold, tiny droplets of fluid containing the cold virus are launched into the air whenever you sneeze or cough. If these are breathed in by someone else, they may also become infected. Infections can also be spread through indirect contact. For example, if you have a cold and you touch your nose or eyes before touching an object or surface, the virus may be passed to someone else when they touch that object or surface. The best way to prevent spreading infections is to practise good hygiene, such as regularly washing your hands with soap and warm water. Read more about preventing germs from spreading. Upper respiratory tract infections Common upper respiratory tract infections include: the common cold   tonsillitis \u2013 infection of the tonsils and tissues at the back of the throat sinusitis \u2013 infection of the sinuses laryngitis \u2013 infection of the larynx (voice box)  flu A cough is the most common symptom of an upper RTI. Other symptoms include headaches, a stuffy or runny nose, a sore throat, sneezing and muscle aches. Lower respiratory tract infections  Common lower RTIs include: flu \u2013 which can affect either the upper or lower respiratory tract bronchitis \u2013 infection of the airways pneumonia \u2013 infection of the lungs bronchiolitis \u2013 an infection of the small airways that affects babies and children aged under two tuberculosis \u2013 persistent bacterial infection of the lungs As with upper RTIs, the main symptom of a lower RTI is a cough. However, it's usually more severe and you may bring up phlegm and mucus. Other possible symptoms are a tight feeling in your chest, an increased rate of breathing, breathlessness and wheezing. Managing your symptoms at home Most RTIs pass without the need for treatment and you won't usually need to see your GP. You can treat your symptoms at home by taking over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, drinking plenty of fluids and resting. In most cases, antibiotics aren't recommended because they're only effective if the infection is caused by bacteria. The symptoms of an upper RTI usually pass within one to two weeks. When you should see your GP Visit your GP if:  your symptoms suggest you may have pneumonia \u2013 for example, if you're coughing up bloody mucus and phlegm you have a pre-existing heart, lung, liver or kidney condition you have a long-term lung condition, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma  you have a condition that affects your nervous system, such as multiple sclerosis you have cystic fibrosis or bronchiectasis you have a weakened immune system your cough has persisted for more than three weeks, you're losing weight, you have chest pain or if there are any lumps in your neck It's also recommended that you visit your GP if you're over 65 years of age and you have a cough and two or more of the factors listed below, or you're over 80 years of age and have a cough and one of the following factors: you've been admitted to hospital at some point during the past year you have type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes you have a history of heart failure you're currently taking a type of steroid medication known as oral glucocorticoids \u2013 for example, prednisolone  You can also ask your GP about any vaccines you can have to help protect against some RTIs. See the 'Adults' tab on The NHS vaccinations schedule page for more information about these. Page last reviewed: 14\/04\/2015 Next review due: 14\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 521 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 227  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 153  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cold or flu? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Do you know the difference between a cold and flu? An expert explains the conditions, treatments and remedies available. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Bronchitis Cold and flu advice Common cold Cough Flu Pneumonia Sore throat External links NICE: RTIs - antibiotic prescribing Treat Yourself Better Colds and flu The difference between a cold and flu, remedies and who needs to have the flu jab Antibiotic awareness Antibiotic resistance is a problem in all healthcare settings across England and Europe. Find out what's done to combat antibiotic resistance How to prevent germs from spreading Cleaning and good hygiene tips to help reduce the number of germs in your home Find and choose services for Respiratory tract infection Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Respite care","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/CarersDirect\/yourself\/timeoff\/Pages\/Accessingrespitecare.aspx","content":"Carers' breaks and respite care - Care and support - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Your guide to care and support What's your situation? I need care I need help at home I'm leaving hospital I want advice about paying for care I want to plan for my future care needs I want advice on choosing services I'm worried someone is being badly treated I'm unhappy with my care and support I need help caring for someone My child has a disability I'm a young carer I need a break from caring Care and support: what's changing? Find your local social services Care services and advice How to get care services Your right to care and support Assessing your care needs Carers' assessments Care after discharge from hospital Care and support plans Choosing care services What is personalisation? Mental health: Care Programme Approach Special educational needs support Transition planning for young people with support needs Types of services What care services are available? Care equipment, aids and adaptations Mobility equipment, wheelchairs and scooters Telecare and alarms Accessible toys, play and learning Care at home (homecare) Supported living services Care homes Shared lives schemes Housing options Children and young people's services Transport and getting around with mobility issues Wellbeing advice Abuse or neglect of vulnerable adults Accessible breaks, activities and day trips Meals, nutrition and feeding Medicines: tips for carers Personal hygiene for cared-for people Thinking about the future? There's no better time to plan for your future care needs than right now. Find out all about how to arrange and fund the care that you'll need one day Find your local social services Staying independent with dementia Carers Direct helpline service Money and your rights Funding care How to fund your care Paying for your own care Council funding for care Direct payments and personal budgets NHS continuing healthcare Mental health aftercare Disability benefits Personal Independence Payment Disability Living Allowance Attendance Allowance Constant Attendance Allowance Health costs Financial help with health and care if you're on a low income Means-tested benefits Pension Credit Income Support Employment and Support Allowance Jobseeker's Allowance Housing Benefit Claiming benefits Challenging a benefit decision Tax and tax credits Help paying Council Tax Tax credits Rights The Equality Act Decision-making and mental capacity Power of attorney Legal help Advocacy The Care Act and your rights Work Disability in the workplace Complaints How to make a complaint How does the Care Act affect you? Coping financially when you're terminally ill Find local social services For carers Carers' rights Carers and the Care Act Carers' assessments Carers' assessments: what happens next Carers' employment rights Returning to work as a carer Young carers' rights Money and legal Carers' benefits Carer's Allowance Claiming Carer's Allowance Challenging a Carer's Allowance decision Benefits for carers who aren't working Carers' Credit Claiming means-tested benefits Financial help for parent carers Carers Direct helpline service Caring issues Caring and communication difficulties Dealing with challenging behaviour Moving and handling someone else Caring and sharing your home When someone you care for dies Parenting a child with complex needs Tips on caring for a disabled child Who can help young carers? Need a break from caring? You may need a break from time to time, to look after your own health and wellbeing. Your carer's assessment can help you get one Caring for someone with dementia Video: caring for a parent Find your local social services You are here: Health A-Z Your guide to care and support Share: Save: Print: Carers' breaks and respite care Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. The Care Act and what it means for me Media last reviewed: 30\/09\/2015 Next review due: 30\/09\/2017 Your carer's assessment may identify that you need a break from caring from time to time. Equally, the person you care for may also want to have a break without you. See Accessible day trips and activities for help planning their trip. Replacement care and respite care Replacement care is designed to replace the care that you, as a carer, would normally be giving the person you care for. It may be needed so you can look after your own health and wellbeing, and to take a break from caring. For example, it may be that regular replacement overnight care is needed so you can catch up on your own sleep. In certain situations, respite (temporary) care may be provided by your local authority after your carer's assessment or after the person you care for has had an assessment. You can use the directory of local carers' services to find your nearest local carers' centre or respite service. Your local authority or local carers' centre can give you information about local support. Carer's tip from Scope \"Some hospices provide respite care; we have found this very helpful. They offer high-level care, which means you can feel comfortable your family member is being cared for properly.\" Breaks for carers After your carer's assessment, you may agree with your local authority that you need a break as part of your support plan. If the local authority has agreed to fund the breaks in your care plan, you should be able to choose how you can get your break. Using direct payments to get time off caring After your assessment, if you are eligible for support, your local authority will develop a support plan with you. This will include a personal budget, which you can choose to have as a direct payment. For example, you may choose to:  hire a care worker through an agency so you can go on a shopping trip use the direct payment to pay for a supported holiday for both you and the person you care for \u2013 the Short Breaks Network can provide more information on this Alternatives to direct payments You may also want to consider funding or getting a break from caring by: asking for care organised by your local authority getting funding from a benevolent fund or charity paying for a break yourself accessing bursaries and low-cost holidays getting leisure discounts asking friends and family to help Replacement care provided by the local authority Instead of a direct payment, you could ask the local authority to arrange services for you so you can have a break. You can also use a direct payment to fund traditional forms of respite care, and you can pool your direct payments with other people's to fund services such as day centres. Some local authorities provide vouchers (sometimes called respite grants, or carers' grants) that can be exchanged for services, such as those offered by care agencies or residential homes. You might be able to use vouchers to pay for extra costs associated with your holiday, including live-in care workers, short-stay residential care, or the cost of more homecare. You might want to consider: homecare services \u2013 these can either be day services that give you the chance to do an activity inside or outside the home, or night services that can help you get a proper night's sleep, or helpers coming to the home of the person you're caring for. Different types of help can be organised, including sitting with the person you care for and keeping them company, preparing meals, and helping them to get up, washed and dressed. The care workers who come to your home can also provide social activities, such as taking the person you care for to the cinema, pub or shopping. residential or nursing care \u2013 this is where the person you're looking after goes for a short stay in a residential or nursing home. If you can, visit the care or nursing home beforehand so you can see what it's like.  day care \u2013 this is where the person you're looking after goes to a day centre or takes part in activities away from home. If the replacement care provided is essentially a homecare service for the person needing care and allows you to take a break, it should be considered a service provided to the cared-for person and should therefore be charged to them, not you as the carer. Find out more in Carer's assessment. Benevolent funds or charity funding You may be able to get help with the cost of going on holiday \u2013 either alone or with the person you care for \u2013 from a charity or benevolent fund. Your social worker, GP, health visitor or local carers' support group can give you more information on local benevolent funds and other possible sources of funding. You might find help from the following: Saga Respite for Carers Trust provides a limited number of free holidays each year for carers over the age of 50 and the people they look after. The Family Fund can provide grants towards the cost of holidays for families on a low income who are caring for a child with a severe disability. The Family Holiday Association is a UK charity providing breaks at holiday sites, or grants to help with the cost of a holiday, to low-income families in need of a holiday away from home. You need to be referred by your social worker, GP or health visitor, or by a charity or other welfare agent. The Children's Country Holiday Fund provides respite breaks in the countryside for young carers aged 6 to 16 and disadvantaged children and young people. Paying for your own breaks If after a carer's assessment the local authority decides it will not fund a break for you, you can still decide to pay for your own break from caring. How you go about this will depend on your budget and the care options available to you locally. Bursaries and low-cost holidays Some charities offer low-cost holidays or bursaries to families. The national charity Diabetes UK offers support holidays for families and young people. Holidays are low cost and a bursary can be offered to families who can't afford the travel costs to the UK holiday site. Further information can be found on the Diabetes UK website or on 020 7424 1000 (ask for the care support team). Turn2us, an independent charity, can help you find sources of financial support based on your particular needs and circumstances. Saga, the organisation for people aged 50 and older, has a range of holidays and short breaks to suit carers, including group holidays, holidays for single travellers, special interest holidays, and cruises. Holidays are run throughout the year in the UK and abroad. Saga also offers free holidays for carers through the Saga Respite for Carers Trust. Leisure discounts Many local authorities offer leisure cards. These can help you pay for activities you might like to do when you get a break from caring. They're often available to people claiming benefits such as Income Support, Employment and Support Allowance, Carer's Allowance and benefits for disabled people, students over 18 in full-time education, and people over 60. The eligibility requirements vary between areas, but there's a good chance you'll qualify if you're a carer with a low income. Local authorities might make a small annual charge for the card, from £1 up to around £15. You'll probably be asked for some proof of your entitlement, such as a statement of entitlement for Income Support or an official letter. Discount leisure cards can give you discounts of between 10 and 50% on activities, services and entertainment. These range from sporting activities at local leisure centres to cinemas, theatres, libraries, museums, hairdressers and beauty salons. Help with caring from friends and family Friends and family can provide support for you and the person you care for, especially when you need a break from caring. However, they are not the same as paid professional care workers, and regular caring can place the same stresses on them as on you. They may also be unable or unwilling to commit to giving you a break when you need it. Make sure anyone who takes over from you has all the information they need to look after the person you care for. This may include what they like to eat and at what time, as well as more complex information about the medicines they need to take. Leave a clear list of contacts. These should include the doctor's number, those of nearby family members and friends, and your own number in case of emergencies. If you have an emergency plan, go through it with the people who will be providing replacement care. If the person you care for needs specialist medical or nursing help while you're away, arrange this through their GP. This specialist help can include visits from a district nurse or from a community psychiatric nurse. There is no charge for this healthcare, but each NHS body decides what care it will provide. Help with emergency planning Thinking about what you would do in an emergency should be part of the discussion you have as part of your carer's assessment. The person who carries out your assessment should be able to help you with planning. Carer's tip from Scope \"It might be a good idea to choose someone from your family to be the person's guardian in case of death. You should ensure that person is familiar, and keep them up-to-date with needs.\" To create an emergency plan, you will need to note down details of: the name, address and any other contact details of the person you look after who you and the person you look after would like to be contacted in an emergency \u2013 this could be friends, family or professional people involved in the person's care any medication the person is taking any ongoing treatment they need You can register with a carers emergency scheme in your area. If you do, a skilled worker trained to look at your individual situation may be able to help you make your emergency plans. Who can help make an emergency plan? Every carer who has an assessment should be asked about emergencies and offered help to plan for them. The social worker involved in your carer's assessment should be able to help you with emergency planning. Page last reviewed: 15\/01\/2015 Next review due: 15\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 74 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Accessible trips and activities Carer's Allowance Coming out of hospital Funding care Help at home External links Family Fund  Saga Respite for Carers Trust Short Breaks Network   Turn2us: benefits and grants information Chill 4us Carers: campaigning for unpaid carers Care and support services Find services near you Find and compare services Services Alzheimers disease Carers Dementia information and support End of life hospice services GP Home aids and adaptions Palliative care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Carers emergency scheme Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Gordon Conochie from the Princess Royal Trust for Carers and Crossroads Care explains the carers emergency scheme, which gives peace of mind to carers. David, who cares for his partner Martin, carries a carers emergency card. It identifies him as a carer, and who he cares for, in case of an emergency. Please note that since this video was published the above organisations have become Carers Trust and Gordon Conochie is no longer working for the organisation. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Carers' assessments Carers' assessments are the best way to get help and support from your local authority if you look after someone What benefits can carers get? All about the different benefits you may be eligible for if you're looking after someone else in need of care Call the Carers Direct helpline The Carers Direct helpline (0300 123 1053) offers confidential information and advice for carers Caring and challenging behaviour Behaviour can be defined as \"challenging\" if it puts anyone at risk, or leads to poorer quality of life. Find out how to cope with challenging behaviour NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Restless legs syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Restless-leg-syndrome","content":"Restless legs syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Restless legs syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Restless-leg-syndrome Clinical trials Restless-leg-syndrome Community Restless legs syndrome Restless-leg-syndrome Symptoms Restless-leg-syndrome Causes Restless-leg-syndrome Diagnosis Restless-leg-syndrome Treatment Introduction  Restless legs syndrome, also known as Willis-Ekbom disease, is a common condition of the nervous system that causes an overwhelming, irresistible urge to move the legs. It can also cause an unpleasant crawling or creeping sensation in the feet, calves and thighs. The sensation is often worse in the evening or at night. Occasionally, the arms are affected too. Restless legs syndrome is also associated with involuntary jerking of the legs and arms, known as periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS). Some people have the symptoms of restless legs syndrome occasionally, while others have them every day. The symptoms can vary from mild to severe. In severe cases, restless legs syndrome can be very distressing and disrupt a person's daily activities. What causes restless legs syndrome? In the majority of cases, there's no obvious cause of restless legs syndrome. This known as idiopathic or primary restless legs syndrome, and it can run in families. Some neurologists (specialists in treating conditions that affect the nervous system) believe the symptoms of restless legs syndrome may have something to do with how the body handles a chemical called dopamine. Dopamine is involved in controlling muscle movement and may be responsible for the involuntary leg movements associated with restless legs syndrome. In some cases, restless legs syndrome is caused by an underlying health condition, such as iron deficiency anaemia or kidney failure. This is known as secondary restless legs syndrome. There's also a link between restless legs syndrome and pregnancy. About 1 in 5 pregnant women will experience symptoms in the last three months of their pregnancy, although it's not clear exactly why this is. In such cases, restless legs syndrome usually disappears after the woman has given birth. Read more about the causes of restless legs syndrome. Treating restless legs syndrome Mild cases of restless legs syndrome that aren't linked to an underlying health condition may not require any treatment, other than making a few lifestyle changes, such as: adopting good sleep habits \u2013 for example, following a regular bedtime ritual, sleeping regular hours, and avoiding alcohol and caffeine late at night quitting smoking if you smoke exercising regularly during the daytime If your symptoms are more severe, you may need medication to regulate the levels of dopamine and iron in your body. If restless legs syndrome is caused by iron deficiency anaemia, iron supplements may be all that's needed to treat the symptoms. Read more about treating restless legs syndrome. Who's affected by restless legs syndrome? As many as 1 in 10 people are affected by restless legs syndrome at some point in their life. Women are twice as likely to develop restless legs syndrome than men. It's also more common in middle age, although the symptoms can develop at any age, including childhood. Outlook The symptoms of restless legs syndrome will usually disappear if it's possible to address an underlying cause.  However, if the cause is unknown, the symptoms can sometimes get worse with time and severely affect the person's life. Restless legs syndrome isn't life threatening, but severe cases can severely disrupt sleep (causing insomnia) and trigger anxiety and depression. The charity Restless Leg Syndrome UK provides information and support for people affected by restless legs syndrome, and may be able to put you in touch with other people in your area affected by the condition. Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2015 Next review due: 02\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1190 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 465  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 345  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 118  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 195  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links How to get to sleep Insomnia Iron deficiency anaemia Parkinson's disease Relaxation tips to relieve stress External links International Restless Legs Syndrome Study Group Moodjuice: sleep problems RLS-UK: living with RLS The Sleep Council: sleep advice Why lack of sleep is bad for your health Sleep deprivation can have profound consequences for your mental and physical health Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Restless legs syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Restricted growth","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Restricted-growth","content":"Restricted growth (dwarfism) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Restricted growth (dwarfism)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Restricted-growth Clinical trials Restricted growth Restricted-growth Symptoms Restricted-growth Causes Restricted-growth Diagnosis Restricted-growth Treatment Introduction  Restricted growth, sometimes known as dwarfism, is a condition characterised by short stature. There are two main types of restricted growth: proportionate short stature (PSS) \u2013 a general lack of growth, where the length of the trunk and limbs are in proportion disproportionate short stature (DSS) \u2013 where the limbs are shorter or out of proportion with other parts of the body As well as having short stature, some people with restricted growth also have other physical problems, such as bowed legs or an unusually curved spine. However, most people don't have any other serious problems. They can often live a relatively normal life and have a normal life expectancy. Read more about the symptoms of restricted growth. What causes restricted growth? The most common cause of PSS is being born to small parents, but it can sometimes occur as a result of the body not producing enough growth hormone. Certain genetic syndromes, such as Turner syndrome and Prader-Willi syndrome, can also cause PSS. DSS usually occurs as part of a genetic condition, such as achondroplasia. Many children born with DSS have parents of average height and the faulty gene causing the condition occurred by chance. If your child is diagnosed with restricted growth, tests will be carried out to try to identify the underlying cause. Read more about the causes of restricted growth and diagnosing restricted growth. Managing restricted growth Treatments recommended for people with restricted growth depend on the cause of the condition and any associated problems they have. A number of different healthcare professionals will usually be involved in your care. Some people with restricted growth may benefit from treatment with growth hormone injections, which can help a child with restricted growth grow more than they otherwise would. In cases of DSS where the legs are particularly short, a leg-lengthening procedure is sometimes used, although this is controversial and there is uncertainty about its safety and effectiveness. Read more about treatments for restricted growth. Page last reviewed: 05\/03\/2015 Next review due: 05\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 39 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Restricted growth (dwarfism): Christian\u2019s story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Christian has achondroplasia which is a form of short-limbed dwarfism. In this video Christian describes what it was like growing up with the condition. He also highlights the importance of support from parents and child\u2019s care teams to children with restricted growth. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Prader-Willi syndrome Turner syndrome External links Restricted Growth Association Child Growth Foundation NICE: adults with growth hormone deficiency NICE: children with growth hormone deficiency NICE: lower limb lengthening Dwarf Sports Association United Kingdom Little People UK NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Restrictive cardiomyopathy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cardiomyopathy\/Pages\/Introduction.aspx#restrictive","content":"Cardiomyopathy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cardiomyopathy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Cardiomyopathy is a general term for diseases of the heart muscle, where the walls of the heart chambers have become stretched, thickened or stiff. This affects the heart's ability to pump blood around the body. Some types of cardiomyopathy are inherited and are seen in children and younger people. This page explains the main types of cardiomyopathy: dilated cardiomyopathy hypertrophic cardiomyopathy restrictive cardiomyopathy arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy takotsubo cardiomyopathy or 'broken heart syndrome' It then explains:  diagnosing cardiomyopathy treating cardiomyopathy information about you Dilated cardiomyopathy In dilated cardiomyopathy the muscle walls of the heart have become stretched and thin, so they can't contract (squeeze) properly to pump blood around the body. How serious is it? If you have dilated cardiomyopathy, you're at greater risk of heart failure, where the heart fails to pump enough blood around the body at the right pressure. Heart failure typically causes shortness of breath, extreme tiredness and ankle swelling. Learn more about the symptoms of heart failure. There's also a risk of heart valve problems, an irregular heartbeat and blood clots. You'll need to have regular appointments with your GP so the disease can be monitored. Who's affected? Dilated cardiomyopathy can affect both children and adults.  The heart muscle can become stretched if you have an unhealthy lifestyle or an underlying medical condition, or both. The following can all play a role in the disease: uncontrolled high blood pressure an unhealthy lifestyle \u2013 such as a lack of vitamins and minerals in the diet, heavy drinking and recreational drug use a viral infection that causes inflammation of the heart muscle   a heart valve problem a disease of the body tissues or vessels \u2013 such as Wegener's granulomatosis, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, lupus, polyarteritis nodosa, vasculitis or muscular dystrophy inheriting a mutated (changed) gene that makes you more vulnerable to the disease pregnancy \u2013 cardiomyopathy can sometimes develop as a complication of pregnancy But for many people, the cause is unknown. More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on living with dilated cardiomyopathy. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the heart muscle cells have enlarged and the walls of the heart chambers thicken. The chambers are reduced in size so they can't hold much blood, and the walls can't relax properly and may stiffen. How serious is it? Most people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy will be able to live a full, normal life. Some people don't even have symptoms and don't need treatment. But that doesn't mean the condition can't be serious. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common cause of sudden unexpected death in childhood and in young athletes. The main heart chambers can become stiff, leading to back pressure on the smaller collecting chambers. This can sometimes worsen the symptoms of heart failure and lead to abnormal heart rhythms (atrial fibrillation). Blood flow from the heart may become reduced or restricted (known as obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). Also, the mitral heart valve can become leaky, causing blood to leak backwards. Read more about mitral regurgitation. These heart changes can cause dizziness, chest pain, shortness of breath and temporary loss of consciousness. You'll also be at greater risk of developing endocarditis (a heart infection). If you have severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, you'll need to see your doctor regularly so your condition can be monitored. Your doctor will advise about the level and amount of exercise you can do and sensible lifestyle changes to make.  Who's affected? Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is thought to affect 1 in 500 people in the UK. Most people inherit the disease from their parents. Read more about how genetic conditions are inherited.   More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on living with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Restrictive cardiomyopathy Restrictive cardiomyopathy is rare and mostly affects older adults. The walls of the main heart chambers become stiffened and rigid and can't relax properly after contracting. This means the heart can't fill up properly with blood. It results in reduced blood flow from the heart and can lead to symptoms of heart failure, such as breathlessness, tiredness and ankle swelling, as well as heart rhythm problems. In many cases the cause is unknown, although sometimes it can be inherited. More information Read the American Heart Association's leaflet on restrictive cardiomyopathy (PDF, 102kb). Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy In arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), the proteins that normally hold the heart muscle cells together are abnormal. Muscle cells can die and the dead muscle tissue is replaced with fatty and fibrous tissue. The walls of the main heart chambers become thin and stretched, and can't pump blood around the body properly. People with ARVC typically have heart rhythm problems. Reduced blood flow from the heart can also lead to symptoms of heart failure. ARVC is an uncommon inherited condition caused by a mutation (change) in one or more genes. It can affect teenagers or young adults and has been the reason for some sudden unexplained deaths in young athletes. There's increasing evidence that prolonged, strenuous exercise worsens the symptoms of ARVC. It's important that people with or at risk of ARVC have a careful discussion about this with their cardiologist. More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on ARVC. Diagnosing cardiomyopathy Some cases of cardiomyopathy can be diagnosed after various heart scans and tests, such as an electrocardiogram (ECG) and an echocardiogram. Cardiomyopathy that runs in the family can be diagnosed after a genetic test. If you've been diagnosed with cardiomyopathy, you may be advised to have a genetic test to identify the mutation (faulty gene) that caused this. Your relatives can then be tested for the same mutation and, if they have it, their condition can be monitored and managed early. Treating cardiomyopathy  There's no cure for cardiomyopathy, but the treatments described below are usually effective at controlling symptoms and preventing complications. Not everyone with cardiomyopathy will need treatment. Some people only have a mild form of the disease that they can control after making a few lifestyle changes. Lifestyle changes If the cause of your cardiomyopathy isn't genetic, it should generally help to: follow a healthy diet and take gentle exercise quit smoking (if you smoke) lose weight (if you're overweight) avoid or reduce your intake of alcohol  get plenty of sleep manage stress make sure any underlying condition, such as diabetes, is well controlled  Medication Medication may be needed to control blood pressure, correct an abnormal heart rhythm, remove excess fluid or prevent blood clots.  Read about: medication for high blood pressure beta-blockers to treat an irregular heartbeat or heart failure diuretics to remove excess fluid from your body if this has caused swelling anticoagulants such as warfarin to prevent blood clots medication to treat heart failure Hospital procedures In some people with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the septum (the wall dividing the left and right side of the heart) is thickened and bulges into the main heart chamber. They may need to have either: an injection of alcohol into their heart \u2013 this is to reduce part of the muscle in the septum a septal myectomy \u2013 heart surgery to remove part of the thickened septum (the mitral valve may be repaired at the same time, if necessary) Those with heart rhythm problems may need to have a pacemaker, or a similar device, implanted to control their abnormal heart rhythm. Read more about having a pacemaker fitted. As a last resort, a heart transplant may be necessary. Information about you If you have cardiomyopathy, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. GOV.UK has more information about the register. Broken heart syndrome Some people who sustain significant emotional or physical stress, such as bereavement or major surgery, go on to experience a temporary heart problem. The heart muscle becomes suddenly weakened or \"stunned\", causing the left ventricle (one of the heart's main chambers) to change shape. It may be caused by a surge of hormones, particularly adrenaline, during this period of stress. The main symptoms are chest pain and breathlessness, similar to those of a heart attack \u2013 always call 999 if you or someone else experiences these. The condition \u2013 known medically as Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, or acute stress cardiomyopathy \u2013 is temporary and reversible. It's unusual for it to happen again. Source: British Heart Foundation Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/06\/2016 Next review due: 23\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 82 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Congenital heart disease Endocarditis Heart failure Valve replacement External links British Heart Foundation: cardiomyopathy The Cardiomyopathy Association Arrhythmias Find out what you need to know about arrhythmias or heart rhythm problems Is your blood pressure too high? At least 25% of adults have high blood pressure. Get tips on how to keep healthy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Retinal detachment","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Retinal-detachment","content":"Retinal detachment - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Retinal detachment  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Retinal-detachment Clinical trials Retinal detachment Retinal-detachment Causes Retinal-detachment Treatment Retinal-detachment Recovery Introduction  Retinal detachment occurs when the thin lining at the back of your eye called the retina begins to pull away from the blood vessels that supply it with oxygen and nutrients. Without prompt treatment, it will lead to blindness in the affected eye.  Warning signs and symptoms Most people will experience warning signs that indicate their retina is at risk of detaching before they lose their sight. These include: the sudden appearance of floaters \u2013 black dots, specks or streaks that float across your field of vision (usually only one eye is affected) a cobweb effect of lots of little floaters \u2013 others report a single large black floater that looks like a housefly sudden short flashes of light in the affected eye lasting no more than a second blurring or distortion of your vision Without treatment, sight in the affected eye will start to deteriorate. Most people describe this as a shadow or \"black curtain\" spreading across their vision. Retinal detachment usually only occurs in one eye. If your eye is affected, there is an up to one in 10 chance that retinal detachment will happen in your other eye. When to seek medical advice Contact your GP immediately if you get any of these warning signs. If this is not possible, telephone NHS 111 or your local out-of-hours service for advice. Causes The retina lies at the back of your eye and sends signals to the brain, allowing it to see. Without a blood supply, the nerve cells die which leads to a loss of sight. Retinal detachment is most often the result of the retina becoming thinner and more brittle with age and pulling away from the underlying blood vessels. It can also be caused by a direct injury to the eye, but this is less common. Read more about the causes of retinal detachment. Diagnosis If your GP suspects retinal detachment, it is likely you will be referred to an eye specialist (ophthalmologist), usually on the same day. The ophthalmologist will study the back of your eye with an ophthalmoscope (a magnifying glass connected to a light) and a slit lamp (a microscope that magnifies the eye while you rest your head on a chin rest). If there is a poor view of the retina, an ultrasound scan may also be used.  Treatment The quicker retinal detachment is treated, the less risk there is of permanently losing some or all of your vision in the affected eye. Most detached retinas can be successfully reattached with surgery. There are a number of different types of surgery available, depending on the individual. It can take months to fully recover from surgery on your eye. During this period you may have reduced vision, which means you may not be able to do some of your usual activities, such as driving or flying. Some people's eyesight does not fully return after surgery and they have permanently reduced peripheral (side) or central vision. This can happen even if the retina is reattached successfully. This risk is higher the longer the detachment was left untreated. Read more about treating retinal detachment and recovering from retinal detachment surgery. Who is affected? Retinal detachment is rare. Only one in every 10,000 people will develop it in any given year in the UK. As retinal detachment is associated with ageing, most cases affect older adults aged between 60 and 70. Retinal detachment caused by an injury can affect people of any age, including children. JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Driving If you have a retinal detachment, it could affect your ability to drive. It is your legal obligation to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) about a medical condition that could have an impact on your driving ability.  Find out about driving and medical conditions on the GOV.UK website. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/01\/2015 Next review due: 09\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 302 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 158  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Eye health Floaters Short-sightedness Visual impairment Find an optician External links DVLA: medical conditions Moorfields: eye health RNIB: retinal detachment Look after your eyes Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery Find and choose services for Retinal detachment Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Retinal migraine","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/retinal-migraine","content":"Retinal migraine - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Retinal migraine  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Retinal migraine   Retinal migraine (ocular migraine) is an eye condition that causes brief attacks of blindness or visual problems like flashing lights in one eye.  These episodes can be frightening, but in most cases they're harmless and shortlived, and eyesight goes back to normal afterwards. Some people get retinal migraine every few months, although the frequency can vary. Retinal migraine is a separate condition and shouldn't be confused with headache-type migraine or migraine with aura, which usually affects the vision of both eyes. Symptoms of retinal migraine The symptoms of retinal migraine may include: partial or total loss of vision in one eye \u2013 this usually lasts 10 to 20 minutes before vision gradually returns headache \u2013 this may happen before, during or after the vision attack It's unusual for an episode of vision loss to last longer than an hour. The same eye is affected every time in almost all cases. Vision may slowly become blurred or dimmed, or there may be flashes of light. Some people see a mosaic-like pattern of blank spots (scotomas), which enlarge to cause total loss of vision. When to seek medical advice If your eyesight suddenly deteriorates, make an emergency appointment to see an optician trained to recognise eye abnormalities and signs of eye disease (optometrist), your GP, or call NHS 111. Use our directory to find opticians or find GP services. It's important to see an optometrist or medical doctor urgently if you suddenly lose your eyesight, particularly if it occurs for the first time. There are other more serious causes of sight loss that doctors will want to rule out. Diagnosing retinal migraine If you manage to see a GP or optometrist during an attack, they may be able to see the decreased bloodflow to your eye using an instrument called an ophthalmoscope. In this case the GP or optometrist may be able to make a confident diagnosis of retinal migraine. However, as attacks are usually brief it's more likely you'll be diagnosed based on an account of your symptoms. You may be referred to an eye specialist for tests to rule out other more serious eye diseases or stroke. Causes of retinal migraine Retinal migraine is caused by the blood vessels to the eye suddenly narrowing (constricting), reducing the bloodflow to the eye. It may be triggered by: stress smoking high blood pressure  hormonal birth control pills exercise bending over high altitude dehydration low blood sugar excessive heat Afterwards the blood vessels relax, bloodflow resumes and sight returns. Usually there are no abnormalities within the eye and permanent damage to the eye is rare. Retinal migraine tends to be more common in: women people aged under 40 people with a personal or family history of migraines or other headaches people with an underlying disease \u2013 such as lupus, hardening of the arteries, sickle cell disease, epilepsy, antiphospholipid syndrome, and giant cell arteritis Treatment for retinal migraine Treatment for retinal migraine usually just involves taking pain relief for any headaches and reducing exposure to anything that might be triggering the retinal migraine. Your doctor may sometimes prescribe medication, such as: aspirin \u2013 to reduce pain and inflammation a beta-blocker \u2013 which may help relax blood vessels a calcium channel blocker \u2013 which may help prevent blood vessels constricting a tricyclic antidepressant \u2013 which may help prevent migraine anti-epileptics \u2013 which may help prevent migraine However, there's still a lack of research about the best way to treat or prevent a retinal migraine. Possible complications of retinal migraine There's a small risk that the reduced bloodflow may damage the thin layer at the back of the eye (the retina) and the blood vessels of the eye. This will be monitored in your follow-up appointments. Permanent vision loss is rare. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/07\/2016 Next review due: 26\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 405 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 230  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 113  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Migraine Find optician services External links PubMed Central: retinal migraine case study Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Retinoblastoma (eye cancer in children)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/retinoblastoma","content":"Retinoblastoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Retinoblastoma (eye cancer in children)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview retinoblastoma Clinical trials Retinoblastoma Introduction  Retinoblastoma is a rare type of eye cancer that can affect young children (usually under five years of age). If it's picked up early, retinoblastoma can often be successfully treated (children treated for retinoblastoma diagnosed at an early stage have a survival rate of more than 95%). Retinoblastoma can either affect one or both eyes. If it affects both eyes, it's usually diagnosed before a child is one year old. If it affects one eye, it tends to be diagnosed later (between the ages of two and three). This page covers: Symptoms of retinoblastoma Causes of retinoblastoma  Diagnosing retinoblastoma Treating retinoblastoma Screening for retinoblastoma Getting support Signs and symptoms of retinoblastoma Signs and symptoms of retinoblastoma include: an unusual white reflection in the pupil \u2013 this may be apparent in photos where only the healthy eye appears red from the flash, or you may notice it in a dark or artificially lit room a squint a change in the colour of the iris \u2013 in one eye or sometimes only in one area of the eye  a red or inflamed eye \u2013 though your child won't usually complain of any pain poor vision \u2013 your child may not focus on faces or objects, or they may not be able to control their eye movements (this is more common when both eyes are affected); they may say that they can't see as well as they used to These symptoms may be caused by something other than retinoblastoma. However, you should get them checked by your GP as soon as possible. It's unusual for retinoblastoma to progress unnoticed beyond the age of five. Signs in older children include the eye appearing red, sore or swollen, and some loss of vision in the affected eye. What causes retinoblastoma? Retinoblastoma is cancer of the retina. The retina is the light-sensitive lining at the back of the eye. During the early stages of a baby's development, retinal eye cells grow very quickly and then stop growing. However, in rare cases, one or more cells continue to grow and form a cancer called retinoblastoma. In about 4 out of 10 (40%) of cases, retinoblastoma is caused by a faulty gene, which often affects both eyes (bilateral). The faulty gene may be inherited from a parent, or a change to the gene (mutation) may occur at an early stage of the child's development in the womb. It's not known what causes the remaining 60% of retinoblastoma cases. In these cases, there's no faulty gene and only one eye is affected (unilateral). Around 50 to 60 children are diagnosed with retinoblastoma in the UK each year. Diagnosing retinoblastoma Your GP will carry out a 'red reflex test' in a darkened room using an ophthalmoscope (a magnifying instrument with a light at one end). When a light is shone into your child's eyes, your GP will see a red reflection if the retina is normal. If the reflection is white, it may be a sign of an eye condition such as cataracts, retinal detachment or retinoblastoma. In this case, your child will be urgently referred (within two weeks) to an eye specialist for further investigation. The eye specialist (ophthalmologist) will examine your child's eyes, and they may carry out another red reflex test. Eye drops will be used to increase the size of your child's pupils, allowing a clear view of the retina at the back of the eye. An ultrasound scan is also sometimes used to help diagnose retinoblastoma. This is a painless procedure where gel is rubbed on the outside of the eyelid and a small ultrasound probe is placed on the eyelid, which scans the eye. After these investigations, if the eye specialist thinks your child has retinoblastoma they'll refer them to one of two specialist retinoblastoma treatment centres, either at The Royal London Hospital (RLH) or the Birmingham Children's Hospital (BCH). Your child's appointment should be within a week of being seen at your local eye clinic. At the specialist centre, your child will need to have a general anaesthetic so their eyes can be thoroughly examined and a diagnosis of retinoblastoma can be confirmed or ruled out. Treating retinoblastoma Your child will be treated by a specialist retinoblastoma team at either the Royal London Hospital or Birmingham Children's Hospital. However, if your child needs chemotherapy, it will usually be carried out at a local children's cancer centre and overseen by the retinoblastoma team at one of the two specialist hospitals. The recommended treatment for retinoblastoma will depend on the stage of the tumour which can either be: intraocular \u2013 where the cancer is completely within the eye extraocular \u2013 where the cancer spreads beyond the eye to the surrounding tissue, or to another part of the body (this is rarely seen in the UK)  Most cases of retinoblastoma (9 out 10) are detected early and successfully treated before the cancer spreads outside the eyeball. If the cancer has spread beyond the eye it will be more difficult to treat. However, this is rare as the condition is usually identified well before it reaches this stage. Depending on the size and position of the tumour, your child's specialist will be able to accurately stage the cancer into one of a number of categories (A to E). Visit the American Cancer Society to read more about how retinoblastoma is staged. Treating small tumours There are two possible treatment options for treating small tumours contained within the eye. These are: laser treatment to the eye (photocoagulation or thermotherapy) freezing the tumour (cryotherapy) These treatments are carried out under general anaesthetic, so your child will be unconscious and won't feel any pain or discomfort during the procedure. In some cases, chemotherapy (see below) may be needed before or after these treatments. Treating larger tumours Larger tumours will be treated with one or a combination of the following treatments: brachytherapy \u2013 if the tumour isn't too large, small radioactive plates called plaques are stitched over the tumour and left in place for a few days to destroy the tumour, before being removed; radiotherapy to the whole eye may be recommended for larger tumours that haven't responded to other treatment methods chemotherapy \u2013 may be used to shrink the tumour before one of the above treatments are used, or it may be recommended if there's a chance of the cancer spreading; in some cases, chemotherapy medication can be delivered directly to the eye surgery to remove the eye \u2013 is often necessary for very large tumours where there's no sight from the eye; if your child needs to have their eye removed, they'll have an artificial eye fitted in its place You can find out more about artificial eyes from the National Artificial Eye Service. Side effects of treatment Your child's treatment team will discuss any possible side effects of treatment with you. Different treatments have different side effects. Sight loss is one of the biggest worries for parents. Your child's treatment team will do everything they can to avoid your child losing their sight. If your child needs to have one of their eyes removed, the sight in their other eye won't be affected as long as there are no tumours in the important areas for seeing in that eye. Children who lose sight in one eye are usually able to adapt very quickly to using their other eye, without it affecting their home and school life. If both eyes are affected by retinoblastoma, your child will probably have some degree of sight loss, and they may need support either within a mainstream or specialist school. The UK-based retinoblastoma charity, the Childhood Eye Cancer Trust (CHECT), has more information about the side effects of treatment for retinoblastoma. Follow-up Retinoblastoma requires a long period of follow-up tests, which will initially be carried out at one of the specialist retinoblastoma centres. After a period of treatment and observation, the tests will usually take place at your local eye department. Screening for retinoblastoma If you're expecting a baby and you had retinoblastoma yourself as a child, or you have a family history of retinoblastoma, it's important to tell your GP or midwife. This is because in some cases retinoblastoma is an inherited condition and babies considered at increased risk of developing it may be offered screening after the birth. Your GP will be able to refer you to a specialist centre so the appropriate tests can be arranged when your baby is born. Your children's risk will depend on the type of retinoblastoma you or your relative had. The aim of screening is to identify tumours as early as possible so that treatment can be started straight away. Children under five years of age are usually screened by having their eyes examined while under general anaesthetic. This will be carried out at one of the UK's two specialist retinoblastoma centres (The Royal London Hospital or Birmingham Children's Hospital). Your child will need to be screened frequently up until they're five years old. Does my child need screening? The Childhood Eye Cancer Trust (CHECT) says that your child may need to be screened if: you or your partner has had retinoblastoma and you're expecting a baby or you've recently had a baby you or your partner has had retinoblastoma and you have a child under five years of age who hasn't been checked you have a child who's been diagnosed with retinoblastoma and you're expecting a baby, or you have other children under five who haven't been checked your parent (or brother or sister) had retinoblastoma and you have a child under five who hasn't been checked Getting support The specialist teams at the retinoblastoma centres at The Royal London Hospital and Birmingham Children's Hospital have a wealth of knowledge about retinoblastoma. You can discuss any worries or concerns you have with them. They'll also be able to put you in touch with the parents of children who've recently been diagnosed with retinoblastoma and treated for it. The Childhood Eye Cancer Trust (CHECT) can give you further information about retinoblastoma. It also provides help and support to parents and carers of children affected by retinoblastoma, as well as adults who were affected during childhood. You can contact them on 020 7377 5578 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm). You can also call the Cancer Research UK helpline to speak to a cancer nurse who will be able to provide you with information and support. The number is 0808 800 4040 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm). Macmillan operate a similar helpline \u2013 0808 808 00 00 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 8pm). Page last reviewed: 17\/02\/2016 Next review due: 17\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 32 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Eye cancer Radiotherapy Squint External links Barts Health NHS Trust: retinoblastoma genetic screening Birmingham Children's Hospital: retinoblastoma service Cancer Research UK: retinoblastoma Childhood Eye Cancer Trust Newborn physical examination All new parents are offered a physical examination for their newborn. Find out what's involved Eye tests for children Read about when eye tests are routinely offered to children, what they involve and why they're important. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rett syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rett-syndrome","content":"Rett syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rett syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rett syndrome Introduction  Rett syndrome is a rare condition that affects the development of the brain. It can cause severe physical and mental disability that begins in early childhood. The condition affects approximately one in every 10-12,000 females and is only rarely seen in males. Signs and symptoms Rett syndrome usually goes unnoticed for the first few months of the child's life, although parents often realise with hindsight that their child did show some features of the condition quite early on. Parents tend first to become aware of the condition when their child\u2019s development slows and she then begins to show some of the signs mentioned below. Experts generally describe four stages of the disease, although symptoms will overlap between each stage. The main features of each stage are described below. Stage one: early signs and slow development Stage one describes the changes that typically appear in the first six to 18 months of the infant's life. These include: a general slowness in development floppiness (hypotonia) difficulty feeding abnormal hand movements (such as repeatedly making wringing, clapping or washing motions with the hands) lack of interest in toys  poor co-ordination of trunk and limbs Stage two: regression Stage two, known as 'regression' or the 'rapid destructive stage', is where a child starts to lose some of their abilities. This stage usually begins between the ages of one and four and may last for weeks or months. Your child will gradually or suddenly start to develop severe problems with communication, language, learning, co-ordination and other brain functions. Signs at this stage include: no longer able to use the hands purposefully \u2013 repetitive and uncontrollable hand movements take over periods of distress, irritability and sometimes screaming for no obvious reason social withdrawal, a loss of interest in people and avoidance of eye contact (may be considered as resembling autism spectrum disorder) unsteadiness and awkwardness when walking rapid or slow breathing, including periods where the child holds their breath problems sleeping slowing of head growth\/small head size difficulty eating, chewing or swallowing and tummy aches, bloating and constipation Stage three: plateau Stage three of the condition usually begins between ages two and 10 and can last for years. At this stage, girls are considered to have emerged from the period of regression in stage two. Prominent symptoms during this stage can include: floppiness of the limbs and difficulty moving around not being able to use their hands to hold, carry or manipulate objects, with the persistence of repetitive hand movements teeth grinding and abnormal tongue movements not gaining much weight Many children will also develop seizures (epilepsy), irregular breathing patterns (for example, holding their breath or shallow breathing followed by rapid, deep breathing) and some may develop heart rhythm abnormalities (arrhythmias). There may be some improvements in earlier problems during this stage as well, such as: an improvement in behaviour, with less irritability and crying increased interest in her surroundings improvements in alertness, attention span, interest in people and communication improvement in walking ability (or learning to walk, if previously unable to do so) Many girls remain in this stage for most of their life. Stage four: deterioration in movement Stage four can last for years or even decades. The main symptoms at this stage are: the spine bending to the left or right side (scoliosis) spasticity (abnormal stiffness, especially in the legs) loss of the ability to walk  The repetitive hand movements may decrease by this stage and eye gaze usually improves. The seizures also usually become less of a problem in adolescence and early adult life, although they will normally be a lifelong problem to manage. What causes Rett syndrome? Most cases of Rett syndrome are caused by a mutation (change in the DNA) in the MECP2 gene, which is found on the X chromosome (one of the sex chromosomes), although mutations in other genes have been found in some cases where the symptoms don't quite follow the classic pattern described above. The MECP2 gene contains instructions to make a particular protein (MeCP2) that is vital for brain development. The gene abnormality prevents nerve cells in the brain from developing properly. Although Rett syndrome is caused by a genetic mutation, almost all cases are sporadic and occur without any family history of the condition. This is known as a 'de novo' mutation. Why is Rett syndrome almost always seen in girls? Each person normally has one pair of sex chromosomes in each cell \u2013 females have two X chromosomes and males have one X and one Y. However, only a single X chromosome is fully functional in any cell, in both males and females. In females, one of the two X chromosomes is largely inactivated early in the embryo stage of development and the cells produced from these early cells then maintain the pattern of inactivating that particular X chromosome. Which chromosome is inactivated is chosen at random, so any female will have some areas where one X is active and other areas where the other X is active. Rett syndrome results when half the cells in the child's brain are normal (make use of the X chromosome with an intact MECP2 gene) and half are abnormal, which means they survive but don\u2019t work properly because they are using the X chromosome with a damaged MECP2 gene. Rare exceptions of Rett syndrome in males occur when, for example, the male is born with an extra X chromosome so he has three sex chromosomes (XXY; known as Klinefelter's syndrome), or when the change is found in only some of the boy's cells (known as mosaicism). As in females, these situations result in a brain with a mix of functioning and impaired cells. Males who carry the abnormal MECP2 gene on their only X chromosome will usually develop a serious condition known as infantile encephalopathy, which is often fatal at a very young age. Males with less severe changes in their MECP2 gene can live a long life, although they may have some learning difficulties. Females who carry these milder changes on one of their two X chromosomes will often be perfectly healthy, as the unaffected X chromosome is able to compensate for this type of genetic fault on the affected chromosome. Diagnosing Rett syndrome A diagnosis of Rett syndrome is largely based on the symptoms your child has. A genetic blood test can also be carried out to look for the genetic mutation responsible for the condition, although this is not found in every child with Rett syndrome. Finding a change in this gene can therefore help confirm the diagnosis, but failing to find it does not rule out the condition. If you have a child with Rett syndrome and you are thinking about trying for another baby, it may be possible to test you and your partner to see if you carry one of the genetic faults that could be passed to your children. However, as the vast majority of cases occur randomly, the risk of having a second child with Rett syndrome is usually low (estimated at around 1%) but may be higher in some circumstances. Read more about genetic testing and counselling. Managing Rett syndrome There is no cure for Rett syndrome and the symptoms can be very difficult to manage. You are likely to need help from a wide range of different health professionals. Your child may benefit from some of the following treatments and aids: anti-epileptic medicine to control the seizures physiotherapy, posture changes, a back brace and possibly spinal surgery to prevent their spine from curving further (read more about treating scoliosis) a high-calorie diet, with the use of a feeding tube and other feeding aids if necessary occupational therapy to help them develop skills needed for dressing, feeding and other daily living activities an ankle-foot orthosis (lower leg brace) to help them walk independently a hand splint to help control their hand movements, if these are severe beta-blocker medication or a pacemaker to control their heart rhythm picture boards, eye gaze technology and other visual aids to help them communicate Therapeutic horse riding, swimming, hydrotherapy and music therapy have also been reported to be beneficial. Ask your healthcare team where you can access these therapies. Read more about caring for a disabled child and the aids and adaptations you may need if you're a parent carer. Outlook Although some people with Rett syndrome may retain a degree of hand control, walking ability and communication skills, most will be dependent on 24-hour care throughout their lives. The lifespan of someone with the condition is generally shortened, often because of life-threatening arrhythmias, but many people live well into middle age and beyond. Information about your child If your child has Rett syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Rett syndrome is caused by a genetic mutation  Advice for carers Caring for a child with Rett syndrome is mentally and physically challenging. Most carers will need social and psychological support. The Care and support site provides lots of advice on how you can take time to look after yourself, including: keeping fit and healthy getting a break from caring  getting legal support and advocacy  taking care of your wellbeing You may also find it useful to contact a support group, such as Rett UK, for information and advice about looking after a child with the condition. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/07\/2014 Next review due: 28\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 120 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support Epilepsy Scoliosis External links Rett UK Reverse Rett Epilepsy Action: Rett syndrome Caring for children with complex needs A child might have complex needs from birth, or following an illness or injury. Find out what support is available NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Reye's syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Reyes-syndrome","content":"Reye's syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Reye's syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Reyes-syndrome Clinical trials Reye's syndrome Introduction   Reye's syndrome is a very rare condition that can cause serious liver and brain damage. If it's not treated promptly it may result in permanent brain injury or death. Reye's syndrome mainly affects children and young adults under 20 years of age. Some cases in older adults have also been reported. Signs and symptoms The symptoms of Reye's syndrome usually begin a few days after a viral infection. Initial symptoms can include: persistent, effortless vomiting  listlessness (a lack of interest or enthusiasm) and a loss of energy drowsiness rapid breathing seizures (fits) As the condition progresses, the symptoms may become more severe and wide ranging, and can include: personality changes, such as extreme irritability, agitation or aggressive behaviour delirium (a severe state of mental confusion and anxiety sometimes associated with hallucinations) coma (loss of consciousness) Seeking medical advice See your GP or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department immediately if you think you or your child may have Reye's syndrome. Although the symptoms will probably not be the result of Reye's syndrome, they still need to be checked by a doctor. Inform the doctor if your child has taken aspirin, as the use of aspirin in children has been linked to Reye's syndrome (see below). However, even if your child isn't known to have taken aspirin, the condition shouldn't be ruled out. What causes Reye's syndrome? The exact cause of Reye's syndrome is unknown, but most cases have occurred in children and young adults recovering from a viral infection \u2013 typically, but not exclusively, flu or chickenpox \u2013 and in most of these cases they had taken aspirin to treat their symptoms. In Reye's syndrome, it is thought that tiny structures within the cells called the mitochondria become damaged. Mitochondria provide cells with energy and they are particularly important for the healthy functioning of the liver because they provide energy for many of its vital functions, such as filtering toxins from the blood and regulating blood sugar levels. If the liver loses its energy supply, it begins to fail. This can result in a dangerous build-up of toxic chemicals in the blood, such as ammonia, which can damage the entire body and can cause the brain to swell. Diagnosing Reye's syndrome As Reye's syndrome is such a rare condition, other conditions that can cause similar symptoms need to be ruled out. These include meningitis (inflammation of the protective membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord), encephalitis (inflammation of the brain) and a group of conditions called inherited metabolic disorders (conditions that affect the chemical reactions taking place in your body). The most common example of an inherited metabolic disorder is medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD). Blood tests and urine tests should be carried out to determine whether there is a build-up of toxins or bacteria in the blood, and to check whether the liver is functioning normally. Special tests may also be undertaken to check for the presence or absence of certain chemicals that could indicate an inherited metabolic disorder. Other tests that may be recommended include: a computerised tomography (CT) scan to check for brain swelling a lumbar puncture \u2013 where a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord) is removed from the spine using a needle to check for bacteria or viruses a liver biopsy \u2013 where a small sample of liver tissue is removed and closely examined under a microscope to look for distinctive cell changes associated with Reye's syndrome Treating Reye's syndrome If Reye's syndrome is diagnosed, you or your child will need to be immediately admitted to an intensive care unit. The aim of treatment is to minimise the symptoms of the condition and support the body's vital functions, such as breathing and blood circulation. It's also essential to protect the brain against permanent damage that can be caused by the brain swelling. A number of medicines may be given intravenously (directly into a vein), such as: electrolytes and fluids \u2013 to correct the level of salts, minerals and nutrients, such as glucose (sugar), in the blood diuretics \u2013 medications to help rid the body of excess fluid and reduce swelling in the brain ammonia detoxicants \u2013 medications to reduce the level of ammonia anticonvulsants \u2013 medications to control seizures A ventilator (breathing machine) may be used if you or your child needs help with their breathing. Vital body functions will also be closely monitored, including the heart rate and pulse, the air flow to their lungs, blood pressure and body temperature. Once the swelling of the brain has decreased, the rest of their body functions should return to normal within a few days, although it may be several weeks before you or your child are well enough to leave hospital. Possible complications As a result of advances in diagnosing and treating Reye's syndrome, the majority of children and young adults who develop the condition will survive, and some will make a full recovery. However, the condition can leave some people with a degree of permanent brain damage caused by the swelling of their brain. Long-term difficulties sometimes associated with Reye's syndrome include: poor attention span and memory some loss of vision or hearing speech and language difficulties problems with movement, dexterity and posture difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) difficulty with everyday tasks, such as dressing or using the toilet If your child develops any long-term problems, an individual care plan will be drawn up to address their needs. This plan will be reassessed as they get older to accommodate any necessary changes in their care. Read more about living with disability and information for carers. Preventing Reye's syndrome Because of the possible link between Reye's syndrome in children and aspirin, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) recommends that children under 16 years old should not take aspirin unless advised to do so by a doctor. Painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen can be used to reduce fever and relieve pain instead. Read more about treating a fever in children. These alternative medications are not suitable for everyone, however, so you should still make sure you carefully read the leaflet that comes with them and ask your GP or pharmacist if you are unsure whether to use them. Children under 16 should also not take any products containing: acetylsalicylic acid acetylsalicylate salicylic acid salicylate salicylate salts Bonjela and Bonjela Cool Mint Gel both contain salicylate salts, which have the same effect on the body as aspirin. See the Bonjela child advice Q&A for more information. Aspirin should only be given to children under 16 on the advice of a doctor when it is felt the potential benefits outweigh the risks. For example, it may be recommended for children with the rare condition Kawasaki disease. Page last reviewed: 15\/12\/2014 Next review due: 15\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 83 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support Chickenpox Children's medicines Fever in children Flu Kawasaki disease External links Brain & Spine Foundation National Information Centre for Metabolic Diseases National Reye's Syndrome Foundation UK Medicines for babies and children Not all medicines are suitable for young children. Find out what to use to treat your sick child Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rhesus factor disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rhesus-disease","content":"Rhesus disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rhesus disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rhesus-disease Clinical trials Rhesus disease Rhesus-disease Symptoms Rhesus-disease Causes Rhesus-disease Diagnosis Rhesus-disease Treatment Rhesus-disease Complications Rhesus-disease Prevention Introduction  Rhesus disease is a condition where antibodies in a pregnant woman's blood destroy her baby's blood cells. It's also known as haemolytic disease of the foetus and newborn (HDFN). Rhesus disease doesn't harm the mother, but it can cause the baby to become anaemic and develop jaundice. Read about the signs of rhesus disease in a baby. What causes rhesus disease? Rhesus disease only happens when the mother has rhesus negative blood (RhD negative) and the baby in her womb has rhesus positive blood (RhD positive). The mother must have also been previously sensitised to RhD positive blood. Sensitisation happens when a woman with RhD negative blood is exposed to RhD positive blood, usually during a previous pregnancy with an RhD positive baby. The woman\u2019s body responds to the RhD positive blood by producing antibodies (infection-fighting molecules) that recognise the foreign blood cells and destroy them. If sensitisation occurs, the next time the woman is exposed to RhD positive blood, her body produces antibodies immediately. If she's pregnant with an RhD positive baby, the antibodies can cross the placenta, causing rhesus disease in the unborn baby. The antibodies can continue attacking the baby's red blood cells for a few months after birth. Read more about the causes of rhesus disease. Preventing rhesus disease Rhesus disease is uncommon these days because it can usually be prevented using injections of a medication called anti-D immunoglobulin. All women are offered blood tests as part of their antenatal screening to determine whether their blood is RhD negative or positive. If the mother is RhD negative, she'll be offered injections of anti-D immunoglobulin at certain points in her pregnancy when she may be exposed to the baby\u2019s red blood cells. This anti-D immunoglobulin helps to remove the RhD foetal blood cells before they can cause sensitisation. If a woman has developed anti-D antibodies in a previous pregnancy (she's already sensitised) then these immunoglobulin injections don't help. The pregnancy will be monitored more closely than usual, as will the baby after delivery. Read more about preventing rhesus disease and diagnosing rhesus disease. Treating rhesus disease If an unborn baby does develop rhesus disease, treatment depends on how severe it is. A blood transfusion to the unborn baby may be needed in more severe cases. After delivery, the child is likely to be admitted to a neonatal unit (a hospital unit that specialises in caring for newborn babies). Treatment for rhesus disease after delivery can include a light treatment called phototherapy, blood transfusions, and an injection of a solution of antibodies (intravenous immunoglobulin) to prevent red blood cells being destroyed. If rhesus disease is left untreated, severe cases can lead to stillbirth. In other cases, it could lead to brain damage, learning difficulties, deafness and blindness. However, treatment is usually effective and these problems are uncommon. Read more about treating rhesus disease and the potential complications of rhesus disease. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 31\/07\/2015 Next review due: 31\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 124 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaemia Newborn jaundice Blood groups Pregnancy and baby guide External links NICE: routine antenatal anti-D propylaxis NICE: antenatal care Antenatal checks and tests Find out about the checks, tests and screening you'll be offered in pregnancy, including blood and urine tests Baby special care Find out about special care for babies born early, sick, jaundiced or with a disability Find and choose services for Rhesus disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rheumatic fever","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rheumatic-fever","content":"Rheumatic fever - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rheumatic fever  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rheumatic-fever Clinical trials Rheumatic fever Rheumatic-fever Symptoms Rheumatic-fever Causes Rheumatic-fever Diagnosis Rheumatic-fever Treatment Rheumatic-fever Complications Introduction  Rheumatic fever is a serious complication that can develop following an untreated throat infection (by a type of bacteria called group A streptococcus). The symptoms of rheumatic fever include joint pain and swelling (arthritis) and inflammation of the heart, which can cause shortness of breath and chest pain. Symptoms usually last around four weeks, but can sometimes persist for several months. Rheumatic fever is rare in the UK. What causes rheumatic fever? The symptoms of rheumatic fever aren't caused by the bacteria itself, but the immune system's response to it. When your body senses the streptococcal infection, it sends antibodies (infection-fighting molecules) to fight it. However, the antibodies sometimes attack the tissues of parts of the body, such as the joints or heart instead. If the antibodies attack your heart, they can cause your heart valves to swell, which can lead to scarring of the valve \"doors\" (called leaflets or cusps). Read more about the causes of rheumatic fever. Treating rheumatic fever There's currently no cure for rheumatic fever. Treatment involves relieving the symptoms with medication and trying to prevent permanent damage to the body, particularly the heart. Once a person has had an attack of rheumatic fever, it's very common for them to have future attacks. This can be prevented by taking a long-term course of antibiotics. Read more about treating rheumatic fever. Complications Rheumatic fever can cause permanent damage to the valves of the heart, which is known as rheumatic heart disease. Rheumatic heart disease can lead to serious complications, including heart failure and stroke. Read more about the complications of rheumatic fever. Who's affected Rheumatic fever is very common in poorer parts of the world, such as Africa, the Middle East and South America, where there's over-crowding, poor sanitation and limited access to medical treatment. It's estimated that just under half a million new cases of rheumatic fever occur worldwide each year. The condition is now very rare in the UK as a result of higher standards of living and medical care. It's estimated that less than 1 in 100,000 people in the UK develop rheumatic fever. Most cases of rheumatic fever first develop in children between the ages of five and 15. It's less likely to affect younger adults, and it's very rare for it to develop in adults who are 35 years of age or over. Both sexes are equally affected. Outlook The outlook for people with rheumatic fever depends on whether they've sustained significant heart damage. If the heart is damaged, it's unlikely to fully recover. In such cases, the symptoms of rheumatic heart disease, such as shortness of breath and constant tiredness, will continue. If the heart is undamaged, long-term use of antibiotics should prevent rheumatic fever occurring again, which should hopefully prevent the heart becoming damaged. Deaths associated with rheumatic heart disease are very rare in the UK and the rest of the developed world. Page last reviewed: 29\/10\/2015 Next review due: 29\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 128 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Heart health Child health 6-15 Streptococcal infections Streptococcal infections Streptococcal infections are any type of infection caused by the Streptococcus ('strep') group of bacteria Find and choose services for Rheumatic fever Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rheumatoid arthritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rheumatoid-arthritis","content":"Rheumatoid arthritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rheumatoid arthritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rheumatoid-arthritis Real stories Rheumatoid-arthritis Clinical trials Rheumatoid-arthritis Community Rheumatoid arthritis Rheumatoid-arthritis Symptoms Rheumatoid-arthritis Causes Rheumatoid-arthritis Diagnosis Rheumatoid-arthritis Treatment Rheumatoid-arthritis Living with Rheumatoid-arthritis Complications   Rheumatoid arthritis is a long-term condition that causes pain, swelling and stiffness in the joints. The symptoms usually affect the hands, feet and wrists. There may be periods where symptoms become worse, known as flare-ups or flares. A flare can be difficult to predict, but with treatment it's possible to decrease the number of flares and minimise or prevent long-term damage to the joints. Some people with rheumatoid arthritis also experience problems in other parts of the body, or more general symptoms such as tiredness and weight loss. Read about the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. When to seek medical advice You should see your GP if you think you have symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis, so they can try to identify the underlying cause. Diagnosing rheumatoid arthritis quickly is important because early treatment can help stop the condition getting worse and reduce the risk of further problems such as joint damage. Read about diagnosing rheumatoid arthritis. Causes of rheumatoid arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease. This means your immune system \u2013 which usually fights infection \u2013 attacks the cells that line your joints by mistake, making the joints swollen, stiff and painful. Over time, this can damage the joint itself, the cartilage and nearby bone. It's not clear what triggers this problem with the immune system, although you're at an increased risk if: you are a woman you have a family history of rheumatoid arthritis you smoke Read more about the causes of rheumatoid arthritis. Treating rheumatoid arthritis There's no cure for rheumatoid arthritis. However, early diagnosis and appropriate treatment enables many people with rheumatoid arthritis to have periods of months or even years between flares. This can help them to lead full lives and continue regular employment. The main treatment options include: medication that is taken in the long-term to relieve symptoms and slow the progress of the condition supportive treatments, such as physiotherapy and occupational therapy, to help keep you mobile and find ways around any problems you have with daily activities surgery to correct any joint problems that develop  Read about treating rheumatoid arthritis. Depending on how much pain, stiffness and joint damage you have, you may have to adapt the way you carry out simple daily tasks. They can become difficult or take longer to complete. Read about living with rheumatoid arthritis. Complications of rheumatoid arthritis Having rheumatoid arthritis can lead to several other conditions that may cause additional symptoms and can sometimes be life-threatening. Possible complications include: carpal tunnel syndrome inflammation of other areas of the body (such as the lungs, heart and eyes) an increased risk of heart attacks and strokes Ensuring that rheumatoid arthritis is well controlled helps reduce your risk of complications such as these. Read about complications of rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A rheumatologist describes the effects of rheumatoid arthritis, a chronic inflammatory disease of the joints, its most common symptoms and the treatment options available. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Page last reviewed: 12\/08\/2016 Next review due: 12\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 778 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 348  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 228  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 117  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Joint pain Osteoarthritis Arthritis External links Arthritis Research UK: rheumatoid arthritis Arthritis Care: rheumatoid arthritis National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society (NRAS) Pain Concern The Pain Toolkit Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Arthritis community","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Arthritis\/Pages\/Community.aspx","content":"Arthritis - Community - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Arthritis - community  Overview Arthritis Lifestyle Arthritis Real stories Arthritis Clinical trials Arthritis Community Arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis community   Community content from HealthUnlocked Useful links NHS Choices links Healthy bones Osteoarthritis Rheumatoid arthritis External links Arthritis Research UK Arthritis Care: about arthritis Arthritis Research UK: inflammatory arthritis pathway Childrens Chronic Arthritis Association (CCAA) Contact a Family: juvenile arthritis Self Management UK National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society Pain Concern: airing pain programme The Pain Toolkit NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find arthritis support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=ArthritisSupport","content":"Find Arthritis information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Arthritis information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rhinitis, allergic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rhinitis---allergic","content":"Allergic rhinitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Allergic rhinitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rhinitis---allergic Clinical trials Allergic rhinitis Rhinitis---allergic Causes Rhinitis---allergic Diagnosis Rhinitis---allergic Treatment Rhinitis---allergic Complications Rhinitis---allergic Prevention Introduction  Allergic rhinitis is inflammation of the inside of the nose caused by an allergen, such as pollen, dust, mould, or flakes of skin from certain animals. It's a very common condition, estimated to affect around one in every five people in the UK. Signs and symptoms Allergic rhinitis typically causes cold-like symptoms, such as sneezing, itchiness and a blocked or runny nose. These symptoms usually start soon after being exposed to an allergen. Some people only get allergic rhinitis for a few months at a time because they're sensitive to seasonal allergens, such as tree or grass pollen. Other people get allergic rhinitis all year round. Most people with allergic rhinitis have mild symptoms that can be easily and effectively treated. But for some symptoms can be severe and persistent, causing sleep problems and interfering with everyday life. The symptoms of allergic rhinitis occasionally improve with time, but this can take many years and it's unlikely that the condition will disappear completely. When to see your GP Visit your GP if the symptoms of allergic rhinitis are disrupting your sleep, preventing you carrying out everyday activities, or adversely affecting your performance at work or school. A diagnosis of allergic rhinitis will usually be based on your symptoms and any possible triggers you may have noticed. If the cause of your condition is uncertain, you may be referred for allergy testing. Read more about diagnosing allergic rhinitis. What causes allergic rhinitis? Allergic rhinitis is caused by the immune system reacting to an allergen as if it were harmful. This results in cells releasing a number of chemicals that cause the inside layer of your nose (the mucous membrane) to become swollen and excessive levels of mucus to be produced. Common allergens that cause allergic rhinitis include pollen \u2013 this type of allergic rhinitis is known as hay fever \u2013 as well as mould spores, house dust mites, and flakes of skin or droplets of urine or saliva from certain animals. Read more about the causes of allergic rhinitis. Treating and preventing allergic rhinitis It's difficult to completely avoid potential allergens, but you can take steps to reduce exposure to a particular allergen you know or suspect is triggering your allergic rhinitis. This will help improve your symptoms. If your condition is mild, you can also help reduce the symptoms by taking over-the-counter medications, such as non-sedating antihistamines, and by regularly rinsing your nasal passages with a salt water solution to keep your nose free of irritants. See your GP for advice if you've tried taking these steps and they haven't helped. They may prescribe a stronger medication, such as a nasal spray containing corticosteroids. Read more about treating allergic rhinitis and preventing allergic rhinitis. Further problems Allergic rhinitis can lead to complications in some cases. These include: nasal polyps \u2013 abnormal but non-cancerous (benign) sacs of fluid that grow inside the nasal passages and sinuses sinusitis \u2013 an infection caused by nasal inflammation and swelling that prevents mucus draining from the sinuses middle ear infections \u2013 infection of part of the ear located directly behind the eardrum These problems can often be treated with medication, although surgery is sometimes needed in severe or long-term cases. Read more about the complications of allergic rhinitis. Non-allergic rhinitis Not all cases of rhinitis are caused by an allergic reaction. Some cases are the result of: an infection, such as the common cold oversensitive blood vessels in the nose overuse of nasal decongestants This type of rhinitis is known as non-allergic rhinitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/02\/2016 Next review due: 15\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 215 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Hay fever Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An allergy specialist explains who's most likely to be affected by hay fever and how you can prevent and relieve the symptoms. Media last reviewed: 29\/05\/2015 Next review due: 29\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Allergies Hay fever Nasal polyps Non-allergic rhinitis Sinusitis External links Action Against Allergy Allergy UK: hay fever and allergic rhinitis BSACI: most common allergies Hay fever Read about hay fever including the various treatment options NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rhinitis, non-allergic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rhinitis---non-allergic","content":"Non-allergic rhinitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-allergic rhinitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rhinitis---non-allergic Clinical trials Non-allergic rhinitis Rhinitis---non-allergic Causes Rhinitis---non-allergic Diagnosis Rhinitis---non-allergic Treatment Rhinitis---non-allergic Complications Introduction  Non-allergic rhinitis is inflammation of the inside of the nose that isn't caused by an allergy. Rhinitis caused by an allergen, such as pollen, is a separate condition known as allergic rhinitis. Symptoms of non-allergic rhinitis can include: a blocked nose a runny nose \u2013 this may be through the nostrils or down the back of the nose (catarrh) sneezing \u2013 although this is generally less severe than in allergic rhinitis mild irritation or discomfort in and around your nose reduced sense of smell In rare cases, non-allergic rhinitis can also cause a crust to develop inside the nose, which may: produce a foul-smelling odour cause bleeding if you try to remove it When to see your GP You should see your GP if you have symptoms of non-allergic rhinitis and the condition is affecting your quality of life. Non-allergic rhinitis can be difficult to diagnose, as there is no test to confirm the condition. Your GP will first ask about your symptoms and medical history. They may then carry out a blood test to check if you have an allergy, or they may refer you to a hospital clinic for more specific tests for allergies, including a \"skin prick test\". If the test results suggest you don't have an allergy, you may be diagnosed with non-allergic rhinitis. Read more about diagnosing non-allergic rhinitis. What causes non-allergic rhinitis? In non-allergic rhinitis, the inflammation is usually the result of swollen blood vessels and a build-up of fluid in the tissues of the nose. This swelling blocks the nasal passages and stimulates the mucus glands in the nose, resulting in the typical symptoms of a blocked or runny nose. There are several possible causes of non-allergic rhinitis, which can be divided into external or internal factors. External factors include: viral infections, such as a cold \u2013 these attack the lining of the nose and throat environmental factors \u2013 such as extreme temperatures, humidity or exposure to noxious fumes, such as smoke Internal factors include: hormone imbalances \u2013 such as those that occur during pregnancy or puberty hormone replacement therapy (HRT) or hormonal contraception Read more about the causes of non-allergic rhinitis. Treating non-allergic rhinitis Although non-allergic rhinitis isn't usually harmful, it can be irritating and affect your quality of life. The best treatment option depends on how severe the condition is and what's causing it. In some cases, avoiding certain triggers and undertaking self care measures, like rinsing your nasal passages, may relieve your symptoms. This can be done using either a homemade solution or a solution made with sachets of ingredients bought from a pharmacy.  In other cases, medication may be needed, such as a nasal spray containing corticosteroids. These will help to relieve the congestion, but usually need to be used over a number of weeks to be fully effective. Before taking any medication for non-allergic rhinitis, always check the leaflet that comes with it, as these treatments aren't suitable for everyone. If you're at all uncertain whether you should be using one of these medications, check with your GP or pharmacist. Read more about treating non-allergic rhinitis. Further problems In some cases, non-allergic rhinitis can lead to complications. These include: nasal polyps \u2013 abnormal, but non-cancerous (benign) sacs of fluid that grow inside the nasal passages and sinuses sinusitis \u2013 an infection caused by nasal inflammation and swelling that prevents mucus draining from the sinuses middle ear infections \u2013 infection of part of the ear located directly behind the eardrum These problems can often be treated with medication, although surgery is sometimes needed in severe or long-term cases. Read more about the complications of non-allergic rhinitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/03\/2016 Next review due: 29\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 302 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Allergic rhinitis Catarrh Decongestants Middle ear infections Nasal polyps Sinusitis External links British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology Home remedies for common conditions Get practical advice to deal with the 10 most common minor health conditions How your pharmacy can help Your local pharmacy is more than just a shop for medicines \u2013 it could save a trip to the GP NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rhinoplasty","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/nose-job.aspx","content":"Nose job Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Nose reshaping (rhinoplasty) Nose reshaping (rhinoplasty, or a 'nose job') is an operation to change the shape or size of the nose. It's not usually available on the NHS if done for cosmetic reasons, but may be provided on the NHS if it's needed to help you breathe. Nose reshaping surgery is a delicate, complex operation. The results can\u2019t be guaranteed, there are risks to consider, and it can be expensive. Be sure about your reasons for having it before you go ahead. It's a good idea to discuss your plans with your GP first. You can also read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\" Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost? The cost of nose reshaping in the UK ranges from £4,500 to £7,000. You should also factor in the cost of any consultations, further surgery or follow-up care that may be needed. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a rhinoplasty. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out the rhinoplasty. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? Nose reshaping is usually carried out under general anaesthetic. The surgeon may do any of the following: make the nose smaller (nose reduction), by removing some of the cartilage and bone make the nose larger (nose augmentation), by taking cartilage from the ears and bone from the hips, elbow or skull, and using this to build up the nose (known as a \"graft\") change the nose's shape (including the nostrils), by breaking the nose bone and rearranging the cartilage change the angle between the nose and top lip The skin over the nose should just shrink or expand to its new shape. The operation involves either making one cut across the skin between the nostrils (\"open rhinoplasty\"), or tiny cuts inside the nostrils (\"closed rhinoplasty\").  A closed rhinoplasty leaves no visible scars and causes less swelling, but isn\u2019t always possible or available. Either way, the procedure can take from an hour and a half to three hours. Most people would need to stay in hospital for one or two nights. You\u2019d probably leave hospital with dressings (\"packs\") in each nostril, and a splint held over your nose with tape. You wouldn't be able to breathe through your nose. Painkillers would be given to control any mild pain. Recovery You may need to take up to two weeks off work to recover. It might be several months before you see the full effect of the nose operation, and up to six months for all of the swelling to completely go. You wouldn't be able to drive for a few days after the operation \u2013 your surgeon would advise about this. After about a week: Stitches would be removed (unless you had dissolvable stitches). The splint may be able to come off. At three weeks: Bruises, swelling and redness may have faded. You may be able to swim. At four to six weeks: You may be able to resume contact sports. You\u2019d probably be advised to: prop your head up with pillows for a couple of days when resting, to reduce the swelling avoid hot baths and getting the splint wet avoid blowing your nose or removing any crusts until your appointment to have the splint removed  sneeze through your mouth, to avoid pressure on your nose avoid dusty or smoky places avoid strenuous exercise or contact sports for four to six weeks take paracetamol or another prescribed painkiller to relieve any mild pain Side effects to expect It\u2019s common after nose reshaping to have: a blocked nose \u2013 you\u2019d need to breathe through your mouth for a week or so stiffness and numbness of the nose soreness, swelling and bruising around the eyes, which can last three weeks light nosebleeds for the first few days What could go wrong Nose reshaping surgery can occasionally result in: permanent breathing difficulty damage to the cartilage wall between your nostrils an altered sense of smell heavy nosebleeds Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, patients find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you have a rhinoplasty and are not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information BAAPS: nose reduction and nose augmentation BAPRAS: rhinoplasty  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: How do I choose a surgeon?  BAAPS: nose reduction and nose augmentation BAPRAS: rhinoplasty   Cosmetic surgery abroad Considering going overseas for your op? Make sure you weigh up any potential savings against the potential risks NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rib injuries","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/rib-injuries","content":"Broken or bruised ribs - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Broken or bruised ribs  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Broken or bruised ribs Introduction  Broken (fractured) or bruised ribs are usually caused by a fall or blow to the chest, or occasionally by severe coughing. They can be very painful, but will normally improve within about three to six weeks. If you think you've injured your ribs, you'll often be able to look after yourself at home. Ribs can't be easily splinted or supported like other bones, so they're usually left to heal naturally. Broken and bruised ribs are generally treated in the same way, so it's not usually necessary to have an X-ray to determine what your exact injury is. You generally only need to seek medical advice if things get worse or don't improve, or if you were injured during a serious accident. See When to see a doctor, below, for more information. How can I tell if I've injured my ribs? A broken or bruised rib will feel very painful, particularly when you breathe in. You may feel you can only take shallow breaths, but it's important you try to breathe normally to help clear mucus from your lungs and prevent chest infections. You may also have some swelling or tenderness in your chest and bruising to the skin. Caring for your injury at home In most cases, you can take care of broken or bruised ribs at home. While your injury heals, pain relief is very important, as it will hurt every time you breathe in or cough. Taking shallow breaths and not coughing to avoid pain will only put you at risk of a chest infection. You can look after yourself by: regularly taking over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol and ibuprofen (aspirin shouldn't be given to children aged under 16) \u2013 follow the dosage instructions on the packet holding an ice pack to your chest regularly during the first few days to reduce the pain and swelling \u2013 a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel will also work resting periodically \u2013 take time off work if you need to, especially if your work involves physical labour or the pain is severe keeping mobile between rest periods \u2013 walking around and moving your shoulders occasionally can help with your breathing and help clear any mucus from your lungs holding a pillow against your chest if you need to cough carrying out breathing exercises \u2013 take 10 slow, deep breaths every hour, letting your lungs inflate fully each time, to help keep your lungs clear Don't wrap a bandage tightly around your chest, as this will stop your lungs expanding properly. Try to avoid lying down or staying still for long periods. It may help to sleep more upright for the first few nights. Avoid straining and lifting heavy objects until you're feeling better, as you may injure yourself further and take longer to recover. If you smoke, stopping may also help your recovery. Get help to stop smoking. When to see a doctor See your GP if your pain hasn't started to improve within a few weeks. They can prescribe stronger painkillers if necessary and refer you to hospital if they feel you need further treatment. Seek medical help immediately if you develop any signs of a more serious problem, such as: increasing shortness of breath increasing chest pain pain in your tummy or shoulder coughing up blood  coughing up yellow or green mucus a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above The above symptoms may indicate a chest infection or may mean a broken rib has damaged your lung, causing the lung to collapse (pneumothorax) or injuring another organ, such as the liver or spleen. Go straight to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department for an assessment if your injury was the result of a serious accident, such as a vehicle collision. Page last reviewed: 29\/04\/2015 Next review due: 29\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 3701 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2070  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 942  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 178  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 389  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chest pain Find accident and emergency services First aid External links Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents About A&E departments Find out when it is appropriate to go to A&E and what other services offer urgent care Broken collarbone How to tell if you've fractured your collarbone and what you should do NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rib, cervical","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cervical-rib","content":"Cervical rib - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cervical rib  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cervical rib Introduction  A cervical rib is an extra rib that forms above the normal first rib, growing from the base of the neck just above the collarbone. The defect is present at birth, but usually not noticed until later in life. It may be a fully-formed bony rib or just a thin strand of tissue fibres, which will not always show up on any X-ray or MRI scans you may have. If the extra rib is only partially formed, it may either end in a swelling that shows as a lump in the neck or it may tail off into a fibrous band of tissue that connects to the first proper rib. A cervical rib can sometimes squash one of the nearby blood vessels or nerves, causing problems such as neck pain and numbness in the arm. These symptoms are collectively known as thoracic outlet syndrome. Thoracic outlet syndrome Not all people with a cervical rib will develop thoracic outlet syndrome, and thoracic outlet syndrome can also be caused by other conditions. Two major blood vessels (the subclavian artery and subclavian vein) and a bunch of nerves called the brachial plexus pass over the cervical rib. They run through a narrow space at the base of the neck towards the armpit and arm. A cervical rib will only cause any symptoms if it is squashing these blood vessels or nerves. Symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome If the extra rib does press on a vessel or nerve, you may have any of the following symptoms: pain in the shoulder and neck, which spreads into the arm \u2013 this may come and go or be constant moments where you lose feeling and have weakness or tingling in the affected arm and fingers moments where you can't carry out fine hand movements, such as doing up buttons Raynaud's phenomenon, where the blood vessels go into a temporary spasm, affecting blood supply to the fingers and toes (turning them white) a blood clot forming in the subclavian artery, which can affect the blood supply to the fingers, causing small patches of red or black discolouration swelling in the affected arm (although this is rare) These symptoms vary widely from person to person: they may be mild or severe, be persistent or come and go. Thoracic outlet syndrome usually starts between the ages of 20 and 50 years old, and women are more likely than men to have it. Treatment Most people diagnosed with a cervical rib will find their symptoms get better with time, without treatment. Your GP may refer you to a physiotherapist for shoulder exercises designed to stretch and strengthen the neck region and correct any poor posture. The area may be massaged to release any tight or shortened neck tissues. A referral to an occupational therapist may also be useful, for advice on techniques to protect your back and neck while at work. To relieve any pain and inflammation, your GP may prescribe you an NSAID painkiller such as naproxen or diclofenac. Read more about non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). If you develop thoracic outlet syndrome you may also be prescribed thrombolytics to break up any blood clots, and anticoagulants to prevent further clots developing. If the above measures don't help and the symptoms persist, you may wish to consider surgical treatment to remove the extra rib, although this is often a last resort.  Your GP can refer you to hospital, at which point your consultant will be able to explain the details of this procedure to you. X-ray showing a cervical rib  Physiotherapy Find out how physiotherapy can help promote healing and wellbeing Page last reviewed: 05\/09\/2014 Next review due: 05\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 85 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Neck pain Shoulder pain X-ray Physiotherapy External links NINDS: thoracic outlet syndrome Neck pain or a stiff neck Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. Find out about the main causes and how to relieve it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rickets","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rickets","content":"Rickets and osteomalacia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rickets and osteomalacia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rickets Clinical trials Rickets Rickets Symptoms Rickets Causes Rickets Treatment Rickets Prevention Introduction  Rickets is a condition that affects bone development in children. It causes the bones to become soft and weak, which can lead to bone deformities. Rickets in adults is known as osteomalacia or soft bones. Rickets can cause bone pain, poor growth and deformities of the skeleton, such as bowed legs, curvature of the spine, and thickening of the ankles, wrists and knees. Children with rickets are also more likely to fracture their bones. Read more about the signs and symptoms of rickets. What causes rickets? A lack of vitamin D or calcium is the most common cause of rickets. Vitamin D largely comes from exposing the skin to sunlight, but it's also found in some foods, such as oily fish and eggs. Vitamin D is essential for the formation of strong and healthy bones in children. In rare cases, children can be born with a genetic form of rickets. It can also develop if another condition affects how vitamins and minerals are absorbed by the body. Read more about the causes of rickets. Who's affected? Rickets was common in the past, but it mostly disappeared in the western world during the early 20th century after foods like margarine and cereal were fortified with vitamin D. However, in recent years, there's been an increase in cases of rickets in the UK. The number of rickets cases is still relatively small \u2013 less than 700 cases were diagnosed in hospitals in England in 2013-14 \u2013 but studies have shown a significant number of people in the UK have low levels of vitamin D in their blood. Any child whose diet doesn't contain enough vitamin D or calcium can develop rickets, but the condition is more common in children with dark skin, as this means they need more sunlight to get enough vitamin D, as well as children born prematurely or taking medication that interferes with vitamin D. Treating rickets For most children, rickets can be successfully treated by ensuring they eat foods that contain calcium and vitamin D, or by taking vitamin supplements. Some families are eligible for free vitamin supplements from the government's Healthy Start scheme \u2013 find out if you qualify for Healthy Start. If your child has problems absorbing vitamins and minerals, they may need a higher supplement dose or a yearly vitamin D injection. Read more about treating rickets. Preventing rickets Rickets can easily be prevented by eating a diet that includes vitamin D and calcium, spending some time in sunlight, and if necessary, taking vitamin D supplements. Read more about: preventing rickets who should take vitamin D supplements how much vitamin D adults, children and babies need When to seek medical advice Take your child to see your GP if they have any of the signs and symptoms of rickets. Your GP will carry out a physical examination to check for any obvious problems. They may also discuss your child's medical history, diet, family history, and any medication they're taking. A blood test to measure calcium, phosphorous and vitamin D levels can usually confirm a diagnosis of rickets, although your child may also have some X-rays or possibly a bone density scan (DEXA scan). This is a type of X-ray that measures the calcium content in bones. Page last reviewed: 21\/12\/2015 Next review due: 21\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 676 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 434  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 148  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Calcium Vitamin D Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D and sunlight Vitamins during pregnancy Vitamins for children External links BDA: food fact sheets British Nutrition Foundation Healthy Start Boost your child's bone health How to make sure your child has strong bones for life, with bone-boosting activities and eating tips for healthy bones How to get vitamin D from sunlight How do you get enough sunshine, but not too much? Here's what the experts say, plus who's most at risk of low vitamin D Vitamins, minerals and supplements How to get all the nutrients you need, and safety advice about supplements NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ringworm","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ringworm","content":"Ringworm and other fungal infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ringworm and other fungal infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ringworm Clinical trials Ringworm Ringworm Symptoms Ringworm Causes Ringworm Diagnosis Ringworm Treatment Ringworm Prevention Introduction  Ringworm is a common fungal infection that can cause a red or silvery ring-like rash on the skin. Ringworm commonly affects arms and legs, but it can appear almost anywhere on the body. Despite its name, ringworm doesn't have anything to do with worms. Other similar fungal infections can affect the scalp, feet, groin and nails. These fungal infections, medically known as \"tinea\", are not serious and are usually easily treated. However, they are contagious and easily spread. Tinea fungal infections There are different types of tinea fungal infection, based on the affected area of the body: ringworm (tinea corporis) \u2013 affecting the body fungal nail infection (onychomycosis) \u2013 affecting the nails athlete's foot (tinea pedis) \u2013 affecting the feet jock itch (tinea cruris) \u2013 affecting the groin tinea capitis \u2013 affecting the scalp Ringworm usually looks like a round, red or silvery patch of skin that may be scaly, inflamed and itchy, but other fungal infections may present themselves slightly differently. Read more about the symptoms of ringworm and other tinea fungal infections. When to see a doctor See your GP if you or your child has a fungal scalp infection, as it\u2019s treated with antifungal tablets, which are only available on prescription. Symptoms of a fungal scalp infection include small patches of scaly scalp skin (which may be sore), patchy hair loss and itchiness. Other types of fungal infections (including ringworm) are generally treated with antifungal cream from the pharmacy, and you don't need to see a doctor unless it persists. However, pharmacists often prefer children to see a GP to confirm a diagnosis. What\u2019s the cause? Fungal spores are passed between people through direct skin contact and by sharing objects such as towels, hairbrushes and bedding. Athlete\u2019s foot is commonly spread in gym and swimming pool changing rooms. Pets, such as dogs and cats, can have ringworm, and you can catch it by stroking them. Read more about the causes of ringworm. Who is affected? It's estimated that 10-20% of people will have ringworm in their lifetime. Although children are more likely to get this, people of all ages can be affected. Groin infections are more common in young men. Fungal scalp infections (tinea capitis) are most common in children who have not reached puberty, particularly African-Caribbean children and those who live in urban areas. Treatment Most ringworm infections are mild and can be treated using a pharmacy antifungal cream. Scalp infections can be treated with antifungal tablets, sometimes combined with antifungal shampoo. If the skin is irritated or broken, it can lead to other bacterial infections, which may need treatment with antibiotics. Read more about how to treat fungal infections. Stopping it spreading It's important to prevent the infection spreading. You should avoid sharing towels, bedding or clothes with someone with a fungal infection. If you think your pet has ringworm, take it to the vet. If your pet is treated quickly, you\u2019ll be less likely to catch it. If your child has a fungal infection, they can go to school, but you should inform their teacher. In addition to treatment, your child should maintain a good level of personal hygiene to prevent the infection spreading. Read more about how to stop the spread of fungal infections. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the skin problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/skin_problems_a_visual_guide.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Look after your skin Benefit your skin by stopping smoking, plus how to protect your skin against sun damage and more Page last reviewed: 05\/03\/2015 Next review due: 05\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 700 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 386  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 174  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medication Athlete's foot Fungal nail infections External links TeensHealth: ringworm Common skin conditions Facts about some of the most common skin problems, including causes and available treatments NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Athlete's foot","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Athletes-foot","content":"Athlete's foot - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Athlete's foot  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Athletes-foot Clinical trials Athletes-foot Community Athlete's foot Introduction  Athlete's foot is a rash caused by a fungus that usually appears between the toes. The affected skin may be itchy, red, scaly, dry, cracked or blistered. It's not usually serious, but should be treated to stop it spreading to other parts of the body or other people. Treatment usually involves pharmacy-bought creams, sprays or liquids and good foot hygiene. The medical name for athlete's foot is tinea pedis. Signs and symptoms of athlete's foot Athlete's foot most commonly affects the skin between the toes or on the bottom of the feet. Affected areas of skin may be: dry, red, scaly and flaky white, soggy and cracked itchy sore covered in small blisters The infection can spread around your foot and to your toenails \u2013 read more about fungal nail infections. Scratching the infected skin and then touching other parts of your body can also spread the infection. In severe cases, skin damaged by athlete's foot can become infected with bacteria. This can lead to cellulitis, which causes the skin to become red, hot and swollen. How do you get athlete's foot? Athlete's foot is caused by fungi growing and multiplying on the skin. The fungi that cause the infection thrive in warm, dark and moist places like feet. You're more likely to get athlete's foot if you: don't keep your feet clean and dry wear shoes that cause your feet to get hot and sweaty walk around barefoot in places where fungal infections can spread easily, such as communal showers, locker rooms and gyms share towels, socks and shoes with other people have a weakened immune system have certain other health conditions, such as diabetes Athlete's foot can easily spread to other people by touching infected skin or coming into contact with contaminated surfaces or objects. Treatments for athlete's foot Athlete's foot is unlikely to get better on its own. It can usually be treated using antifungal treatments available from pharmacies without needing to see a GP. Antifungal treatments work by stopping the fungus causing your athlete's foot from growing. They come in creams, sprays, liquids and powders, and are used in the following way: treatment should be applied directly to the affected skin and surrounding area wash and dry the affected skin before applying the treatment, and clean your hands afterwards continue treatment after the rash has cleared, as described in the leaflet that comes with your medicine, to make sure all the fungus has gone Antifungal treatments are similarly effective, although some work faster than others. A pharmacist can recommend an antifungal medicine that's safe for you to use. Not all types are suitable for children, older people, and pregnant or breastfeeding women. If your rash is very sore and itchy, a pharmacist may recommend using a mild steroid cream to ease any discomfort, but this should only be used for a short period and in combination with antifungal treatment. Contact your GP if your athlete's foot doesn't start to improve after a week of treatment, or if it's causing significant pain or discomfort. Your GP may take a small skin sample for testing and recommend stronger antifungal medicines, including tablets. It's also important to practise good foot hygiene during treatment to speed up recovery and prevent athlete's foot returning. Preventing athlete's foot You can reduce your risk of developing athlete's foot by: drying your feet gently but thoroughly after washing them, particularly the areas between your toes wearing cotton socks and roomy shoes made of natural materials such as leather \u2013 this can allow your feet to \"breathe\" wear a fresh pair of socks, tights or stockings every day change your shoes every couple of days \u2013 this allows them to dry out between uses not walking around barefoot in public showers and locker rooms not sharing towels, socks and shoes with other people, and ensuring your towels are washed regularly  using talcum powder on your feet to stop them getting sweaty not using moisturiser between your toes, as this can help fungi multiply If you or your child develops athlete's foot, there's no need to stay off work or school. Follow the advice above to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others. Page last reviewed: 29\/09\/2015 Next review due: 29\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 636 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 315  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 137  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the foot problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/foot_problems_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medication Foot health Fungal nail infection Nail abnormalities External links College of Podiatry: athlete's foot Foot health How to keep your feet healthy and choose the right sports shoes, plus what to do if you have smelly feet Fungal nail infection Fungal nail infections can affect part or all of the nail, including the nail plate, nail bed and root of the nail Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Fungal nail infection","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Fungal-nail-infection","content":"Fungal nail infection - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Fungal nail infection  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Fungal-nail-infection Community Fungal-nail-infection Clinical trials Fungal nail infection Fungal-nail-infection Treatment   Many people develop a fungal nail infection at some point in their life. It's not usually serious, but can be unpleasant and difficult to treat. The infection develops slowly and causes the nail to become discoloured, thickened and distorted. Toenails are more frequently affected than the fingernails. The medical name for a fungal nail infection is onychomycosis. This page covers: Symptoms Causes Treatments Prevention Symptoms of a fungal nail infection A fungal nail infection may not cause any obvious symptoms at first. As it progresses, the infection can cause: discolouration of the nail \u2013 it may turn white, black, yellow or green thickening and distortion of the nail \u2013 it may become an unusual shape or texture and be difficult to trim pain or discomfort \u2013 particularly when using or placing pressure on the affected toe or finger brittle or crumbly nails \u2013 pieces may break off and come away completely Sometimes the skin nearby may also become infected and be itchy and cracked or red and swollen. Causes of fungal nail infections Most fungal nail infections occur as a result of the fungi that cause athlete's foot infecting the nails. These fungi often live harmlessly on your skin, but they can sometimes multiply and lead to infections. The fungi prefer warm, dark and moist places like the feet. You're more likely to get a fungal nail infection if you: don't keep your feet clean and dry wear shoes that cause your feet to get hot and sweaty walk around barefoot in places where fungal infections can spread easily, such as communal showers, locker rooms and gyms have damaged your nails have a weakened immune system have certain other health conditions, such as diabetes, psoriasis or peripheral arterial disease  Fungal nail infections can be spread to other people, so you should take steps to avoid this (see below) if you have an infection. Treatments for fungal nail infections Treatment isn't always needed for a mild fungal nail infection because it's unlikely to cause any further problems and you may feel it's not worth treating. Whether you decide to have treatment or not, you should still practise good foot hygiene (see below) to stop the infection getting worse or spreading to others. Speak to your GP or pharmacist if you're bothered by the appearance of the affected nail, or it's causing problems such as pain and discomfort. They'll probably recommend: antifungal tablets \u2013 tablets taken once or twice a day for several months antifungal nail paints \u2013 special paints applied directly to the nail over several months nail softening kits \u2013 where a paste is used to soften infected parts of the nail, before they're removed with a scraping device A procedure to remove the nail completely may be recommended in severe cases. Laser treatment, where a high-energy laser is used to destroy the fungus, is also an option. But this is only available privately and can be expensive. Read more about treating a fungal nail infection. Preventing fungal nail infections You can reduce your risk of developing a fungal nail infection by: keeping your hands and feet clean and dry wearing well-fitting shoes made of natural materials and clean cotton socks \u2013 these will allow your feet to \"breathe\" clipping your nails to keep them short \u2013 don't share clippers or scissors with other people not sharing towels and socks with other people, and ensure your towels are washed regularly not walking around barefoot in public pools, showers, and locker rooms \u2013 special shower shoes are available to protect your feet replacing old footwear that could be contaminated with fungi treating athlete's foot as soon as possible to avoid the infection spreading to your nails Nail salon equipment can sometimes be the source of fungal nail infections. If you regularly visit a salon, make sure any equipment used is properly sterilised between uses. Page last reviewed: 22\/09\/2015 Next review due: 22\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 659 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 303  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the nail abnormalities information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/nail_abnormalities_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medicines Athlete's foot Find podiatrist and chiropodist services Foot health Nail abnormalities External links British Association of Dermatologists: fungal infections of the nails (PDF, 270kb) The College of Podiatry: athlete's foot Foot health How to keep your feet healthy and choose the right sports shoes, plus what to do if you have smelly feet Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Root canal treatment","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Root-canal-treatment","content":"Root canal treatment - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Root canal treatment  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Root-canal-treatment Clinical trials Root canal treatment Root-canal-treatment How it is performed   Root canal treatment (endodontics) is a dental procedure used to treat infection at the centre of a tooth (the root canal system). The infection is caused by bacteria that live in the mouth and invade the tooth. This can happen after: tooth decay leaky fillings damage to teeth as a result of trauma, such as a fall This topic covers: Tooth structure When it's needed How it's performed Recovery Tooth structure  A tooth is made up of two parts. The crown is the top part of the tooth that's visible in the mouth. The root extends into the bone of the jaw, anchoring the tooth in position. Teeth also consist of: enamel \u2013 the hard outer coating dentine \u2013 a softer material that supports the enamel and forms most of the tooth  cementum \u2013 a hard material that coats the root's surface dental pulp \u2013 the soft tissue at the centre of the tooth The root canal system contains the dental pulp and extends from the crown of the tooth to the end of the root. A single tooth can have more than one root canal. When root canal treatment is needed Root canal treatment is only required when dental X-rays show that the pulp has been damaged by a bacterial infection. The pulp will begin to die if it's infected by bacteria, allowing the bacteria to then multiply and spread. The symptoms of a pulp infection include: pain when eating or drinking hot or cold food and drink pain when biting or chewing a loose tooth As the infection progresses, these symptoms often disappear as the pulp dies. Your tooth then appears to have healed, but the infection has in fact spread through the root canal system. Further symptoms eventually occur, such as: pain when biting or chewing returning swelling of the gum near the affected tooth pus oozing from the affected tooth facial swelling the tooth becoming a darker colour It's important to see your dentist if you develop toothache. If your tooth is infected, the pulp can't heal by itself. Leaving the infected tooth in your mouth may make it worse. There may also be less chance of the root canal treatment working if the infection within your tooth becomes established. Antibiotics \u2013 medication to treat bacterial infections \u2013 aren't effective in treating root canal infections. How root canal treatment is performed To treat the infection in the root canal, the bacteria need to be removed. This can be done by either: removing the bacteria from the root canal system (root canal treatment) removing the tooth (extraction) However, removing the tooth isn't usually recommended as it's better to keep as many of your natural teeth as possible. After the bacteria have been removed, the root canal will be filled and the tooth sealed with a filling or crown. In most cases the inflamed tissue near the tooth will heal naturally. Before having root canal treatment, you'll usually be given a local anaesthetic. This means the procedure shouldn't be painful and should be no more unpleasant than having a filling. Root canal treatment is usually successful. In about 9 out of 10 cases a tooth can survive for up to 10 years after root canal treatment. Read about how root canal treatment is performed. Recovering from root canal treatment It's important to look after your teeth when recovering from root canal treatment. You should avoid biting on hard foods until all of your treatment is complete. After your final treatment, your restored tooth shouldn't be painful, although it may feel sensitive for a few days. Over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, can be used to relieve any discomfort. Return to your dentist if you continue to experience pain or swelling after using painkillers. In most cases it's possible to prevent the need for further root canal treatment by: maintaining good oral hygiene  not consuming too much sugary food giving up smoking if you smoke Read more about dental health. Rate your dentist You can comment on your NHS dentist and share your experience with others. Rate your dentist Page last reviewed: 01\/07\/2016 Next review due: 01\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 639 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 311  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 167  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dental abscess Dental health Dental health questions Find dental services Gum disease Rate your dentist Tooth decay External links Dental Complaints Service Dental Health Foundation General Dental Council Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening Tooth decay Tooth decay occurs when acids in your mouth dissolve the outer layers of your teeth. Read more about how it's treated and how you can prevent it Finding an NHS dentist How to find an NHS dentist, including where to seek help if you have difficulties locating one in your local area NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rosacea","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rosacea","content":"Rosacea - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rosacea  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rosacea Clinical trials Rosacea Community Rosacea Rosacea Symptoms Rosacea Causes Rosacea Treatment Rosacea Self-help   Rosacea is a common but poorly understood long-term skin condition that mainly affects the face. It can be controlled to some degree with long-term treatment, but sometimes the changes in physical appearance can have a significant psychological impact. This topic covers: Symptoms When to see your GP Causes Treatment and self-help Living with rosacea Ocular rosacea Symptoms of rosacea Symptoms often begin with episodes of flushing, where the skin turns red for a short period, but other symptoms can develop as the condition progresses, such as: burning and stinging sensations permanent redness spots (papules and pustules) small blood vessels in the skin becoming visible Rosacea is a relapsing condition, which means there are periods when symptoms are particularly bad, but less severe at others. Read about the symptoms of rosacea. When to see your GP See your GP if you have persistent symptoms that could be caused by rosacea. Early diagnosis and treatment can help stop the condition getting worse. There's no specific test for rosacea, but your GP will often be able to diagnose the condition by: examining your skin asking about your symptoms asking about possible triggers you may have In some circumstances your GP may arrange further tests to rule out other conditions with similar symptoms, such as lupus or the menopause. For example, these could be a blood test or skin biopsy, where a small scraping of skin is removed and examined. Causes of rosacea The exact cause of rosacea is unknown, although a number of possible factors have been suggested, including abnormalities in the blood vessels of the face and a reaction to microscopic mites commonly found on the face. Although they're not thought to be direct causes of the condition, several triggers have been identified that may make rosacea worse. These include: exposure to sunlight stress strenuous exercise hot or cold weather hot drinks alcohol and caffeine certain foods, such as spicy foods Read about causes of rosacea. Treating rosacea There's currently no cure for rosacea, but treatment can help control the symptoms. Long-term treatment is usually necessary, although there may be periods when your symptoms improve and you can stop treatment temporarily. For most people, treatment involves a combination of self-help measures and medication, such as: avoiding known triggers \u2013 for example, avoiding drinks containing alcohol or caffeine creams and gels \u2013 medications applied directly to the skin to reduce spots and redness oral medications \u2013 tablets or capsules that can help clear up more severe spots, such as oral antibiotics In some cases procedures such as laser and intense pulsed light (IPL) treatment may be helpful. These involve beams of light being aimed at the visible blood vessels in the skin to shrink them and make them less visible. Read about: Treating rosacea  Self-help measures for rosacea Living with rosacea Any long-term (chronic) condition can have an adverse psychological effect, but rosacea can be particularly troublesome as it affects your appearance. This can change how you feel about yourself and how you interact with others. Many people with rosacea have reported feelings of low self-esteem, embarrassment and frustration. It's important to try to come to terms with the fact you have a chronic condition that, although incurable, is controllable. Persevering with your treatment plan and avoiding your individual triggers are the best ways of controlling your symptoms. As your physical symptoms improve, you may start to feel better psychologically and emotionally. If you have rosacea, take comfort in knowing you're not alone. There are millions of people living with the condition in the UK and across the world. You can find support and information from organisations such as: the National Rosacea Society \u2013 an American charity whose website has useful information and advice for people with rosacea Changing Faces \u2013 a charity for people with facial disfigurements, who can be contacted on 0300 012 0275 for counselling and advice Speak to your GP if you're feeling depressed as a result of your condition. They may recommend further treatment if necessary. Ocular rosacea Rosacea that affects your eyes (ocular rosacea) can lead to a number of eye problems, some of which can be serious. Symptoms of ocular rosacea can include: feeling like there is something in your eyes dry eyes irritated and bloodshot eyes inflammation of the eyelids (blepharitis) Rosacea can sometimes cause the cornea, the transparent layer at the front of the eyeball, to become inflamed and damaged. This is known as keratitis. This damage can make the cornea vulnerable to ulceration and infection, which could potentially threaten your sight. Symptoms of serious problems with your corneas include: eye pain sensitivity to light (photophobia) deterioration in your vision Contact your GP immediately if you think you may have a problem with your corneas. If this isn't possible, visit your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department. If keratitis isn't treated promptly by an ophthalmologist, a doctor who specialises in treating eye conditions, there's a risk of permanent vision loss. Rosacea Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Rosacea is a common but poorly understood long-term skin condition that mainly affects the face. It most commonly affects fair-skinned people from northern Europe and is estimated to affect up to one in 10 people. An expert explains what rosacea is, the symptoms to look out for and the various treatments. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/07\/2016 Next review due: 08\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 308 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 120  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acne Blepharitis Blushing Keep skin healthy External links British Association of Dermatologists: rosacea Changing Faces: skin camouflage service International Rosacea Foundation National Rosacea Society Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Skin camouflage: Maria's story Maria Angel talks about growing up with a facial birthmark and how the Changing Faces skin camouflage service has helped Find and choose services for Rosacea Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Roseola","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/roseola","content":"Roseola - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Roseola  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Roseola Introduction  Roseola is a common, usually mild, viral infection that affects babies and toddlers. It often causes a distinctive skin rash, which can look alarming but is harmless. Most children will have been infected with roseola by the time they enter nursery school. They will usually fight off the virus and recover fully within a week. Other medical terms for roseola are \"roseola infantum\" and \"exanthem subitum\". What are the symptoms? Many children get roseola so mildly that they don't really become ill, or the symptoms are too mild to be noticeable. Otherwise, it generally takes a week or two for symptoms to show after becoming infected. Roseola symptoms are general, and are typical of many other viral infections. Stage 1: fever A child with roseola may have: a sudden fever (high temperature), which typically lasts three to five days (read how to take your baby's temperature) a sore throat  a runny nose a cough mild diarrhoea loss of appetite swollen eyelids swollen glands in the neck Body temperature then returns to normal after three to four days, at which point a distinctive pink rash often appears. Stage 2: the rash The rash develops after the fever has died down. It is made up of pink spots or patches, which may be surrounded by a white halo. The rash tends to start on the chest, tummy and back, and often spreads to the face, neck and arms. Sometimes it can spread as far as the face and legs. It shouldn't be itchy or uncomfortable, and fades and disappears within two days. It is easy to confuse the rash with that of another condition, such as measles and rubella. Read about other common causes of skin rashes in babies and how to tell them apart. Possible complications Only in a few cases might a child develop complications such as fever-related seizures, but this is unusual.  These can be frightening, but in most cases are not serious. Read more about febrile seizures. What's the cause? Herpes virus Roseola is caused by a human herpes virus. There are eight types of herpes viruses that can infect humans. Roseola is usually caused by infection with type 6 (human herpesvirus 6, or HHV-6). Cold sores are usually caused by type 1 human herpes virus. How it spreads Roseola is spread in the same way as the common cold \u2013 a child can catch it by coming into contact with the mucus or saliva of an infected child. For example, when an infected child sneezes or coughs, tiny droplets of fluid containing the herpes virus are launched into the air and can be breathed in by others. Also, if an infected child sneezes on a door handle and another child touches the handle a few minutes later and then touches their mouth or nose, they may also catch it. Sharing cups is another common way for the virus to spread.  As soon as a child with roseola develops a fever, they can pass the virus to another child. They don't need to develop a rash to be contagious. But roseola never really causes an outbreak in the way chickenpox does, as it doesn't spread that rapidly. It can be caught at any time of the year. Who is affected? Roseola is most common in infants aged 6 to 18 months. It is only occasionally seen in adults. Older infants are at greatest risk as they haven't had time to develop antibodies against many viruses. Young babies tend to be protected as they still have the antibodies passed on from their mother in the womb. For more information on this, read How long do babies carry their mother's immunity? How is roseola treated? A child with roseola will usually just need bed rest and fluids while the illness runs its course. Keep your child hydrated by giving them plenty of cool water to drink. Even if your child isn't thirsty, try to get them to drink little and often to keep their fluid levels up. To help reduce your child's temperature, you can also: keep them cool if the environment is warm \u2013 for example, you can just cover them with a lightweight sheet keep their room cool \u2013 18C (65F) is about right (open a window if you need to) give them children's paracetamol or ibuprofen \u2013 you can't give them both at the same time, but if one doesn't work you may want to try the other later; these painkillers also act as antipyretics, which means they help reduce fever Paracetamol or ibuprofen aren't always necessary \u2013 for example, if your child isn't distressed by the fever or underlying illness. Always read the patient information leaflet that comes with the medication to find the correct dose and frequency for your child's age. Don't give aspirin to children under 16 unless it's specifically prescribed by a doctor. It has been linked with a rare but dangerous illness. Read more about treating a high temperature in children. Antibiotics are no good for treating roseola, as it is a viral (not a bacterial) infection. Should I see a GP? Most children with roseola recover within a week of the fever starting, so there's usually no need to see a GP. But see your GP if your child has: an unexplained seizure a fever greater than 103F (39.4C) a rash that doesn't improve after three days See a GP yourself if you have a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, because you're having chemotherapy \u2013 and you've had contact with a child with roseola. You'll be more vulnerable to the infection and may need monitoring. Should I keep my child away from nursery? Keep your child off school or nursery while they are unwell. They can go back when they're well, and there's no need to wait until the last spot disappears.  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 21\/10\/2014 Next review due: 21\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 46 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Fever in children Medicines for babies and toddlers External links NICE guidance: feverish illness in children Skin rashes in babies Most rashes in babies are harmless and clear on their own. Find out about the common causes Taking your baby's temperature Find out about what to do if you're worried your baby has a fever NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Roundworm","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Roundworm","content":"Roundworm - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Roundworm  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Roundworm Clinical trials Roundworm Roundworm Symptoms Roundworm Causes Roundworm Treatment Roundworm Prevention Introduction  Roundworms can infest the human gut, where they live, feed and reproduce. They don't often cause any symptoms, but are more likely to in large numbers. A roundworm infection \u2013 also sometimes known as ascariasis or ascaris \u2013 is usually easy to treat. Roundworms are parasites. They use the human body to stay alive, feed and reproduce. A roundworm infection doesn't usually cause any noticeable symptoms. People usually see their GP because they've seen a worm in their stools (faeces). Less commonly, symptoms can include a high temperature and dry cough 4-16 days after swallowing the eggs. If a large number of eggs have been ingested, or if the worms move from the small intestine to other parts of the body, they can cause serious complications, such as a bowel obstruction. However, in England, these types of complications are rare. Read more about the symptoms of a roundworm infection. How infection occurs A roundworm infection can occur if you swallow the microscopic ascaris eggs in contaminated food or water. It's also possible for eggs to be transferred from your hands to your mouth after touching contaminated soil.  After the eggs mature into adult worms, the worms produce more eggs. The eggs are released from the body through the bowel, and can then infect other humans. The more roundworms there are inside your body, the worse your symptoms are likely to be. Read more about the causes of a roundworm infection. Diagnosing a roundworm infection See your GP if you notice a roundworm in your faeces or you have unexplained asthma-like symptoms shortly after visiting a tropical or sub-tropical country. A roundworm infection can be diagnosed by examining a small sample of faeces under a microscope. Infection is confirmed by the presence of eggs or a worm in the sample. Roundworm is a relatively rare condition in the UK, so a stool sample will only be routinely taken if: you experience non-specific gastrointestinal symptoms, such as vomiting or diarrhoea, and you've been abroad within the last two years to a region where roundworm is widespread, such as Africa or Asia you pass a worm in your faeces; the worms have a distinct appearance, which standard laboratories can recognise worms are detected during diagnostic tests Treating a roundworm infection Roundworm infections can usually be successfully treated with medication. The three main medicines that are used to treat an infection are: mebendazole piperazine albendazole Read more about these medicines in treating a roundworm infection. Preventing a roundworm infection Regularly washing your hands can help prevent the spread of a roundworm infection. You should take additional precautions if you're travelling to a part of the world where roundworm is common, such as only drinking bottled water and avoiding raw fruit and vegetables. These are the same precautions that help prevent many other infections associated with poor sanitation. Read more about preventing roundworm infections. Roundworms can grow up to 30-35cm long and are the only worms found in human faeces that are roughly the size of an earth worm  Who's affected by roundworm? Soil-transmitted worm infections, including roundworm, are among the most common infections worldwide. They affect poor and deprived communities, where there is overcrowding and poor sanitation. It's estimated that about a quarter (24%) of the world\u2019s population currently has a soil-transmitted worm infection. Infections commonly occur in tropical and sub-tropical areas of the world, including in sub-Saharan Africa, the Americas, China and east Asia. Most recorded cases of roundworm in England are contracted abroad, either by travellers or migrants who come from parts of the world where roundworm is present. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, an average of 80 cases of roundworm infection are reported every year. Page last reviewed: 26\/08\/2014 Next review due: 26\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 139 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Accessing healthcare abroad Food and water abroad Malnutrition Travel health External links Fit for travel NaTHNaC Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Hookworm infections Hookworm infections are common in developing countries with warm, moist climates Find and choose services for Roundworm Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"RSI","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Repetitive-strain-injury","content":"Repetitive strain injury (RSI) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Repetitive strain injury (RSI)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Repetitive-strain-injury Clinical trials Repetitive strain injury Repetitive-strain-injury Diagnosis Repetitive-strain-injury Treatment Introduction  Repetitive strain injury (RSI) is a general term used to describe the pain felt in muscles, nerves and tendons caused by repetitive movement and overuse. It's also known as work-related upper limb disorder, or non-specific upper limb pain. The condition mostly affects parts of the upper body, such as the: forearms and elbows wrists and hands neck and shoulders Symptoms of RSI The symptoms of RSI can range from mild to severe and usually develop gradually. They often include: pain, aching or tenderness stiffness throbbing tingling or numbness weakness cramp At first, you might only notice symptoms when you're carrying out a particular repetitive action. But without treatment, the symptoms of RSI may eventually become constant and cause longer periods of pain. You may also get swelling in the affected area, which can last for several months. What to do if you think you have RSI If you develop symptoms of RSI and think it may be related to your job, speak to your employer or occupational health representative. It may be possible to modify your tasks to improve your symptoms.  See your GP if symptoms continue, despite attempts to change how you work. Read more about diagnosing RSI. What causes RSI? RSI is related to the overuse of muscles and tendons in the upper body. Certain things are thought to increase the risk of RSI, including: repetitive activities doing a high-intensity activity for a long time without rest poor posture or activities that require you to work in an awkward position Cold temperatures and vibrating equipment are also thought to increase the risk of getting RSI and can make the symptoms worse. Stress can also be a contributing factor. A variety of jobs can lead to RSI, such as working at an assembly line, at a supermarket checkout or typing at a computer. It's important to work in a comfortable environment which has been appropriately adjusted. Your employer has a legal duty to try to prevent work-related RSI and ensure anyone who already has the condition doesn't get any worse. Read more about workplace health. How RSI is treated The first step in treating RSI is usually to identify and modify the task or activity that is causing the symptoms. If necessary, you may need to stop doing the activity altogether. To relieve symptoms, your GP may advise taking a course of anti-inflammatory painkillers (such as aspirin or ibuprofen), or using a heat or cold pack, elastic support or splint. You may also be referred to a physiotherapist for advice on posture and how to strengthen or relax your muscles. Some people find that other types of therapy help to relieve symptoms, including massage, yoga and osteopathy. Read more about treating RSI. How to prevent RSI Most employers carry out a risk assessment when you join a company to check that your work area is suitable and comfortable for you. You can request an assessment if you haven't had one. There are also things you can do to help reduce your risk of RSI, such as: maintaining good posture at work \u2013 see how to sit at a desk correctly  taking regular breaks from long or repetitive tasks \u2013 it's better to take smaller, more frequent breaks than one long lunch break trying relaxation techniques if you're stressed If you work at a computer all day, make sure your seat, keyboard, mouse and screen are positioned so they cause the least amount of strain. See tips on preventing RSI for more detailed advice about using a mouse and keyboard at work. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1414 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 387  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 753  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Healthy back at work Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Trevor Shaw, principal ergonomist, explains how bad posture contributes to health problems including back pain. He describes how to improve your health at work. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Carpal tunnel syndrome Physiotherapy Tendonitis External links Health and Safety Executive Workplace health Improve your health at work, with tips on dealing with stress, RSI, back pain, exercise and healthy lunches Tips to prevent RSI Prevent repetitive strain injury (RSI), with tips on relaxation, checking your workstation, and adjusting your computer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"RTIs (respiratory tract infections)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/respiratory-tract-infection","content":"Respiratory tract infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Respiratory tract infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Respiratory-tract-infection Clinical trials Respiratory tract infection Introduction  Respiratory tract infections (RTIs) are any infection of the sinuses, throat, airways or lungs. They're usually caused by viruses, but can be caused by bacteria. RTIs are thought to be one of the main reasons why people visit their GP or pharmacist. The common cold is the most widespread RTI. Healthcare professionals generally make a distinction between: upper respiratory tract infections \u2013 which affect the nose, sinuses and throat lower respiratory tract infections \u2013 which affect the airways and lungs Children tend to get more upper RTIs than adults because they haven't built up immunity (resistance) to the many viruses that can cause these infections. How respiratory infections spread RTIs can spread in several ways. If you have an infection such as a cold, tiny droplets of fluid containing the cold virus are launched into the air whenever you sneeze or cough. If these are breathed in by someone else, they may also become infected. Infections can also be spread through indirect contact. For example, if you have a cold and you touch your nose or eyes before touching an object or surface, the virus may be passed to someone else when they touch that object or surface. The best way to prevent spreading infections is to practise good hygiene, such as regularly washing your hands with soap and warm water. Read more about preventing germs from spreading. Upper respiratory tract infections Common upper respiratory tract infections include: the common cold   tonsillitis \u2013 infection of the tonsils and tissues at the back of the throat sinusitis \u2013 infection of the sinuses laryngitis \u2013 infection of the larynx (voice box)  flu A cough is the most common symptom of an upper RTI. Other symptoms include headaches, a stuffy or runny nose, a sore throat, sneezing and muscle aches. Lower respiratory tract infections  Common lower RTIs include: flu \u2013 which can affect either the upper or lower respiratory tract bronchitis \u2013 infection of the airways pneumonia \u2013 infection of the lungs bronchiolitis \u2013 an infection of the small airways that affects babies and children aged under two tuberculosis \u2013 persistent bacterial infection of the lungs As with upper RTIs, the main symptom of a lower RTI is a cough. However, it's usually more severe and you may bring up phlegm and mucus. Other possible symptoms are a tight feeling in your chest, an increased rate of breathing, breathlessness and wheezing. Managing your symptoms at home Most RTIs pass without the need for treatment and you won't usually need to see your GP. You can treat your symptoms at home by taking over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, drinking plenty of fluids and resting. In most cases, antibiotics aren't recommended because they're only effective if the infection is caused by bacteria. The symptoms of an upper RTI usually pass within one to two weeks. When you should see your GP Visit your GP if:  your symptoms suggest you may have pneumonia \u2013 for example, if you're coughing up bloody mucus and phlegm you have a pre-existing heart, lung, liver or kidney condition you have a long-term lung condition, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma  you have a condition that affects your nervous system, such as multiple sclerosis you have cystic fibrosis or bronchiectasis you have a weakened immune system your cough has persisted for more than three weeks, you're losing weight, you have chest pain or if there are any lumps in your neck It's also recommended that you visit your GP if you're over 65 years of age and you have a cough and two or more of the factors listed below, or you're over 80 years of age and have a cough and one of the following factors: you've been admitted to hospital at some point during the past year you have type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes you have a history of heart failure you're currently taking a type of steroid medication known as oral glucocorticoids \u2013 for example, prednisolone  You can also ask your GP about any vaccines you can have to help protect against some RTIs. See the 'Adults' tab on The NHS vaccinations schedule page for more information about these. Page last reviewed: 14\/04\/2015 Next review due: 14\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 521 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 227  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 153  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cold or flu? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Do you know the difference between a cold and flu? An expert explains the conditions, treatments and remedies available. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Bronchitis Cold and flu advice Common cold Cough Flu Pneumonia Sore throat External links NICE: RTIs - antibiotic prescribing Treat Yourself Better Colds and flu The difference between a cold and flu, remedies and who needs to have the flu jab Antibiotic awareness Antibiotic resistance is a problem in all healthcare settings across England and Europe. Find out what's done to combat antibiotic resistance How to prevent germs from spreading Cleaning and good hygiene tips to help reduce the number of germs in your home Find and choose services for Respiratory tract infection Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rubella","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rubella","content":"Rubella - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rubella  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rubella Clinical trials Rubella Rubella Symptoms Rubella Diagnosis Rubella Treatment Rubella Complications Rubella Prevention Introduction  Rubella (german measles) is a viral infection that's now rare in the UK. It's usually a mild condition that gets better without treatment in 7 to 10 days. Symptoms of rubella include: a red-pink skin rash made up of small spots swollen glands around the head and neck a high temperature (fever) cold-like symptoms such as a cough and runny nose aching and painful joints \u2013 more common in adults The symptoms of rubella usually only last a few days, but your glands may be swollen for several weeks. Read more about the symptoms of rubella. When to see your GP You should always contact your GP or NHS 111 if you suspect rubella. Don't visit your GP surgery without phoning first, as arrangements may need to be made to reduce the risk of infecting others. If you're pregnant and develop a rash or come into contact with someone who has a rash, contact your GP or midwife immediately. Read more about diagnosing rubella. Rubella and pregnancy Rubella usually only becomes a serious concern if a pregnant woman catches the infection during the first 20 weeks of her pregnancy. This is because the rubella virus can disrupt the development of the baby and cause a wide range of health problems, including: eye problems \u2013 such as cataracts (cloudy patches on the lens of the eye) deafness heart abnormalities brain damage The birth defects caused by the rubella virus are known as congenital rubella syndrome (CRS). Since the introduction of the mumps, measles and rubella (MMR) vaccine, CRS is now very rare in the UK. Read more about the complications of rubella. How it spreads Rubella is caused by a type of virus called a togavirus. It's spread in a similar way to a cold or flu, through droplets of moisture from the nose or throat of someone who's infected. These droplets are released into the air when someone coughs, sneezes or talks. You can become infected if you come into contact with the droplets from an infected person, although it can take two to three weeks for symptoms to develop. If you have rubella, you'll be infectious to other people from one week before symptoms develop, and for up to four days after the rash first appeared. You should stay away from school or work for four days after the rash starts to avoid infecting others, and try to avoid contact with pregnant women during this time. Who's affected? Rubella is rare in the UK nowadays. Most cases occur in people who came to the UK from countries that don't offer routine immunisation against rubella. However, there can occasionally be large outbreaks of rubella in the UK. One of these occurred in 1996, when there were almost 4,000 cases in England and Wales. There were 12 confirmed cases of rubella in England and Wales in 2013. Treating rubella There's no specific treatment for rubella, but symptoms normally pass within 7 to 10 days. If you or your child are finding the symptoms uncomfortable, you can treat some of these at home while you wait for the infection to pass. For example, paracetamol or ibuprofen can be used to reduce the fever and treat any aches or pains. Liquid infant paracetamol can be used for young children. Aspirin shouldn't be given to children under the age of 16 years. Read more about treating rubella. Preventing rubella The best way to prevent rubella is to be immunised with the MMR vaccine. Children are offered this vaccine as part of the routine childhood immunisation programme. It's given in two doses \u2013 the first when the child is one year old, followed by a second booster dose before they start school, at three years and four months. Routine vaccination is important because it reduces the risk of large outbreaks and helps protect pregnant women and their babies. The MMR vaccine can also be given to older children and adults who haven't been fully immunised before. Contact your GP if you're uncertain whether you or your child are up-to-date with vaccinations. If you're thinking of getting pregnant and you're not sure whether you've had two doses of the MMR vaccine, it's a good idea to check with your GP practice. If your records show you haven't had two doses of MMR or there's no record, ask for the vaccinations. Read more about preventing rubella. Information about you If you or your child has rubella, your clinical team will pass information about you\/your child on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 03\/11\/2015 Next review due: 03\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 209 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links MMR vaccine MMR vaccine news stories NHS vaccinations guide Spotting signs of serious childhood illnesses Vaccination ingredients External links Sense: about rubella MMR vaccine Find out about the MMR vaccine, which protects against measles, mumps and rubella Infectious illnesses in children Symptoms to look out for if you're concerned your child may have an infectious childhood illness NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rubeola","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Measles","content":"Measles - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Measles  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Measles Clinical trials Measles Measles Symptoms Measles Treatment Measles Complications Measles Prevention Introduction  Measles is a highly infectious viral illness that can be very unpleasant and sometimes lead to serious complications. It's now uncommon in the UK because of the effectiveness of vaccination. Anyone can get measles if they haven't been vaccinated or they haven't had it before, although it's most common in young children. The infection usually clears in around 7 to 10 days. Symptoms of measles The initial symptoms of measles develop around 10 days after you're infected. These can include: cold-like symptoms, such as a runny nose, sneezing, and a cough sore, red eyes that may be sensitive to light a high temperature (fever), which may reach around 40C (104F) small greyish-white spots on the inside of the cheeks A few days later, a red-brown blotchy rash will appear. This usually starts on the head or upper neck, before spreading outwards to the rest of the body. Read more about the symptoms of measles. When to see your GP You should contact your GP as soon as possible if you suspect that you or your child may have measles. It's best to phone before your visit as your GP surgery may need to make arrangements to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others. You should also see your GP if you've been in close contact with someone who has measles and you've not been fully vaccinated (had two doses of the MMR vaccine) or haven't had the infection before \u2013 even if you don't have any symptoms. Is measles serious? Measles can be unpleasant, but will usually pass in about 7 to 10 days without causing any further problems. Once you've had measles, your body builds up resistance (immunity) to the virus and it's highly unlikely you'll get it again. However, measles can lead to serious and potentially life-threatening complications in some people. These include infections of the lungs (pneumonia) and brain (encephalitis). Read more about the complications of measles. How measles is spread The measles virus is contained in the millions of tiny droplets that come out of the nose and mouth when an infected person coughs or sneezes. You can easily catch measles by breathing in these droplets or, if the droplets have settled on a surface, by touching the surface and then placing your hands near your nose or mouth. The virus can survive on surfaces for a few hours. People with measles are infectious from when the symptoms develop until about four days after the rash first appears. How measles can be prevented Measles can be prevented by having the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine. This is given in two doses as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. The first dose is given when your child is around 13 months old and a second dose is given before your child starts school. Adults and older children can be vaccinated at any age if they haven't been fully vaccinated before. Ask your GP about having the vaccination. If the MMR vaccine isn't suitable for you, a treatment called human normal immunoglobulin (HNIG) can be used if you're at immediate risk of catching measles. Read more about preventing measles. Treating measles There are several things you can do to help relieve your symptoms and reduce the risk of spreading the infection, including: taking paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve fever, aches and pains \u2013 aspirin should not be given to children under 16 years old drinking plenty of water to avoid dehydration closing the curtains to help reduce light sensitivity using damp cotton wool to clean the eyes staying off school or work for at least four days from when the rash first appears In severe cases, especially if there are complications, you or your child may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment. Read more about treating measles. How common is measles? The effectiveness of the MMR vaccine means that cases of measles are uncommon in the UK nowadays. However, the number of cases has risen in recent years and there have been some high-profile outbreaks. For example, between November 2012 and July 2013 there was an outbreak in and around Swansea, during which more than 1,200 cases were reported. It's thought the rise in the number of cases of measles is the result of parents not getting their child vaccinated with the MMR vaccine, probably because of speculation linking MMR to autism. Publicity in 1998 highlighted a report claiming there was a link between the MMR jab and autism. However, numerous studies undertaken to investigate this claim found no link between the MMR vaccine and autism. Page last reviewed: 11\/09\/2015 Next review due: 11\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 755 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 276  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 74  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 318  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Measles Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Learn how measles is transmitted, how to recognise the infection and to treat it. Media last reviewed: 29\/05\/2015 Next review due: 29\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Infectious illnesses in children MMR vaccine Mumps NHS vaccination schedule Rubella External links Fit for Travel: measles Measles outbreak: what to do MMR vaccination is the only prevention. Find out how to protect yourself and your family MMR vaccine Find out about the MMR vaccine, which protects against measles, mumps and rubella NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ruptured eardrum","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Perforated-eardrum","content":"Perforated eardrum - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Perforated eardrum  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Perforated-eardrum Clinical trials Perforated eardrum Perforated-eardrum Surgery Introduction  A perforated eardrum is a hole or tear in the eardrum. It can be uncomfortable, but usually heals within a few weeks or months provided your ear is kept dry and there\u2019s no infection. The eardrum, also known as the tympanic membrane, is a thin layer of tissue that separates the outer ear from the middle ear. A hole in the eardrum can be caused by: a middle ear infection, if pus builds up inside your ear and puts pressure on your eardrum an injury to the eardrum, such as a severe blow to the ear or poking an object such as a cotton bud deep into the ear a sudden loud noise, such as a loud explosion changes in air pressure, such as pressure changes while flying at high altitude or when scuba diving Signs and symptoms One of the main symptoms of a perforated eardrum is hearing loss. This can vary in severity, depending on the size of the hole, and usually goes back to normal once your eardrum has healed. Some people also have symptoms of a middle ear infection, such as: earache or discomfort a discharge of mucus from your ear a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above You may have some ringing or buzzing in your ear (tinnitus) as well. When to see your GP See your GP if you have persistent symptoms of a perforated eardrum.  Although your eardrum will usually heal itself eventually, treatment may be necessary to prevent infections and help improve your hearing. Your GP will use a special instrument called an auriscope or otoscope to examine your eardrum. These have a light and a lens that allow your GP to see any holes or tears in the eardrum. Treating a perforated eardrum Perforated eardrums don't always need to be treated because they normally heal by themselves in a few weeks or months provided that your ear is kept dry and there\u2019s no infection. If you have any pain or discomfort, you can take over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. Never give aspirin to children under 16. Placing a warm flannel against the affected ear may also help relieve the pain. Your GP may prescribe antibiotics if your perforated eardrum was caused by an infection or if there is a risk that an infection will develop while your eardrum heals. You can reduce your risk of developing an infection by keeping your ear dry until it's healed. Don't go swimming, and cover your ears when having a shower. You may need surgery to repair your eardrum if the hole is particularly large or doesn't heal. The procedure used to repair a perforated eardrum is known as a myringoplasty.  Read more about surgery for a perforated eardrum. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/03\/2015 Next review due: 02\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 499 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 264  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 135  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful The ear JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Earache Hearing loss Middle ear infection Tinnitus External links Action on Hearing Loss Hearing problems How to protect your hearing, with tips on spotting when you're going deaf, getting tested and hearing aids NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}