{"conditions":[{"name":"Labial fusion","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/labial-fusion","content":"Labial fusion - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Labial fusion  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Labial fusion, or labial adhesion, is when the small inner lips around the entrance to the vagina become sealed together. In some cases, this can completely seal the vaginal opening, leaving a very small gap at the front that urine passes through. It's a fairly common condition in girls under seven years old and is usually nothing to worry about. Causes of labial fusion It's not certain what causes labial fusion, but it usually occurs as a result of some irritation or inflammation of the vaginal area, known as vaginitis. This can cause the inner lips of the vulva to become sticky. Without enough oestrogen in the body, which is quite normal before puberty, the lips can stay stuck together and gradually become firmly joined. The problem is rarely seen in girls after they begin puberty, because this is when they start to produce the hormone oestrogen. Seeing your GP For most babies or girls, labial fusion doesn't cause any problems and is often discovered accidentally by a parent or carer during nappy changing or bathing. Your GP can confirm labial fusion after doing a routine examination of the child's genital area. Treating labial fusion A labial fusion or adhesion usually separates naturally without treatment. Treatment for labial fusion isn't recommended unless there are other symptoms, such as dribbling after urination, which may cause problems or discomfort. Treatment is with oestrogen cream or ointment applied daily or, very rarely, surgical separation. Oestrogen creams A small blob of the cream or ointment is applied daily on to the central line of fusion of the inner lips of the vulva. This should be continued for four to six weeks until the membrane starts to dissolve and the labia eventually separate completely. When the membrane dissolves, you should stop applying the cream. To enable the labial edges to heal properly and prevent another labial fusion forming, you should continue to apply an emollient, such as nappy rash cream, for a few months after the fusion has separated. Oestrogen creams and ointments can occasionally cause side effects, especially if used for periods longer than a few weeks. They shouldn't be used for longer than six weeks. Side effects can include: irritation around the genital area temporary pigmentation (darkening) of the skin in the genital area vaginal spotting or bleeding after you stop using the cream or ointment Side effects should go away after you stop using the oestrogen cream or ointment. Surgery Surgery is very rarely needed to treat labial fusion. It may be considered if: an oestrogen cream or ointment doesn't work a fusion is particularly thick and severe there's trapped urine in the vagina, which can dribble out after urination and cause vulval soreness Labial fusions are relatively easy to separate \u2013 they can usually be gently pulled apart by hand, or a small blunt probe can be used. A surgical separation is usually performed under a general anaesthetic, where you're asleep, or local anaesthetic, where the area is numbed, as the procedure can be quite painful and can cause distress. To allow the labial edges to heal properly and prevent another labial fusion forming, you'll be advised to apply an emollient, such as nappy rash cream or Vaseline, to the labia for a few weeks afterwards. There's a high chance the fusion will return after treatment, whether you are treated with oestrogen cream or surgery. Complications of labial fusion Labial fusion isn't linked to any medical condition and has no long-term implications for your child \u2013 it won't affect her future fertility or sexual life. In most cases, a fusion corrects itself during puberty. In up to 14% of cases, a fusion may recur, but this tendency usually stops before puberty begins. Rarely, labial fusion can cause: infection (such as a urinary tract infection) soreness or pain in the genital area urine becoming trapped in the vagina, leading to leaking of urine between visits to the toilet Page last reviewed: 20\/06\/2016 Next review due: 20\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 76 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Labial fusion in children Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Labial fusion, or labial adhesion, is when the small lips around the entrance to the vagina (the labia minora) become sealed together and covered with a fleshy membrane. The membrane usually completely seals the vaginal opening, leaving a very small gap at the front through which urine passes. This video explains what labial fusion is, its possible causes, and offers advice on where to seek help. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2019 Useful links NHS Choices links Emollients Pregnancy and baby guide External links British Society for Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Services and support for parents Find out what's available for new parents through the NHS, local authority, helplines and local parent groups NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Labiaplasty","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/labiaplasty.aspx","content":"Labiaplasty Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) A labiaplasty is surgery to reduce the size of the labia minora \u2013 the flaps of skin either side of the vaginal opening. Some women consider having a labiaplasty because they don't like the look of their labia, or because the labia cause discomfort. This is a major decision you should weigh up carefully. It's natural and normal for a woman to have noticeable skin folds around her vaginal opening and, in most cases, this shouldn't cause any problems.  A labiaplasty can be expensive and the operation carries a number of risks. There's also no guarantee you'll get the result you expected, and it won't necessarily make you feel better about your body. If you\u2019re thinking of going ahead, it\u2019s a good idea to discuss your plans with your GP first. There might be a medical condition causing your labial discomfort, or a reason why the operation isn't appropriate for you. If your GP feels that your labia are perfectly normal after examining them, they may want to have a chat with you about your reasons for wanting surgery. You may be advised to speak to a counsellor or psychologist before you commit to any surgery. You can also read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\". Read on to find out the following: How much does a labiaplasty cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems   Who shouldn't have it? How is it different to female genital mutilation? More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, a labiaplasty costs about £1,000-£3,000, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may not be included in the price. Occasionally, a labiaplasty may be carried out on the NHS if the vaginal lips are obviously abnormal and causing the woman distress or harming her health. However, the NHS doesn't routinely provide this operation.  Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a labiaplasty. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out the operation. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong the doctor's patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? A labiaplasty can be carried out using either a general anaesthetic or a local anaesthetic with sedation. The procedure involves shortening or reshaping the vaginal lips. The unwanted tissue is cut away with a scalpel or possibly a laser, and the loose edge may be stitched up with fine, dissolvable stitches. The whole procedure takes about one to two hours. Some patients are able to go home the same day. Recovery You may need to take some time off work to recover. It can take a couple of months for the skin to fully heal. During this time you need to: keep the area clean and free from infection wear loose underwear and clothes to prevent rubbing avoid sex for a few weeks use sanitary towels instead of tampons for a few weeks Your surgeon would give you more specific advice that you should also follow. Side effects to expect It\u2019s typical after a labiaplasty to have soreness, bruising and swelling for up to two weeks. Peeing and sitting during this period would probably be uncomfortable, although you'd be given painkillers to help with this. What could go wrong A labiaplasty can occasionally result in: bleeding infection scarring of tissue reduced sensitivity of the genitals Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: developing a blood clot in a vein an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, patients find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have a problem Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. If you have a labiaplasty and you experience complications or are unhappy with the results, you should take up the matter with the surgeon who treated you. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the GMC. Who shouldn't have it? A labiaplasty should not be performed on girls younger than 18. Their labia may continue to grow and develop well beyond puberty, into early adulthood. How is it different to female genital mutilation? A labiaplasty is offered as cosmetic surgery or as treatment for a medical problem, with the full consent of the patient. Female genital mutilation (FGM) refers to procedures that intentionally alter or cause injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons. It is nearly always carried out on children without their consent, and in these cases is ethically and morally wrong. FGM is illegal in the UK. More information BAAPS: aesthetic genital surgery  BAPRAS: female genital tract surgery  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 3 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: Is cosmetic surgery right for me?  Vulval pain society  BAAPS: aesthetic genital surgery BAPRAS: female genital tract surgery Is my vagina normal? No two vaginas are the same: find out what's normal and healthy when it comes to size, shape and colour NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Labour","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/labour-signs-what-happens.aspx","content":"Signs and stages of labour - Pregnancy and baby guide Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Signs that labour has begun Video Player Search Enter a search term: Add question Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. How will I know I am in labour? Media last reviewed: 20\/03\/2014 Next review due: 20\/03\/2017 Know the signs You\u2019re likely to recognise the signs of labour when the time comes, but if you\u2019re in any doubt, don't hesitate to contact your midwife. The main signs of labour starting are strong, regular contractions and a \"show\". A show is when the plug of mucus from your cervix comes away. Other signs that labour is beginning include your waters breaking (rupture of the membranes), backache and an urge to go to the toilet, which is caused by your baby\u2019s head pressing on your bowel. What are contractions like? When you have a contraction, your womb (uterus) tightens and then relaxes, like a stronger version of period pains. You may have had contractions throughout your pregnancy, particularly towards the end. During pregnancy, these painless tightenings are called Braxton Hicks contractions. When you are having regular, painful contractions that feel stronger and last more than 30 seconds, labour may have started. As labour gets going, your contractions tend to become longer, stronger and more frequent. During a contraction, the muscles in your womb contract and the pain increases. If you put your hand on your abdomen, you will feel it getting harder. When the muscles relax, the pain fades and your hand will feel the hardness ease. The contractions are pushing your baby down and opening your cervix (entrance to the womb), ready for your baby to go through. Your midwife will probably advise you to stay at home until your contractions become frequent. When your contractions last 30-60 seconds and occur every five minutes, call your midwife for guidance. If you\u2019re planning to have your baby in a maternity ward, phone the hospital. Here's more information on when to go to hospital. Backache often comes on in labour You may get backache or the aching, heavy feeling that some women experience with their monthly period. A \"show\" signals the start of labour While you are pregnant, a plug of mucus is present in your cervix. Just before labour starts, or in early labour, the plug comes away and you may pass this out of your vagina. This small amount of sticky, jelly-like pink mucus is called a show. It may come away in one blob, or in several pieces. It is pink in colour because it\u2019s bloodstained, and it's normal to lose a small amount of blood mixed with mucus. If you\u2019re losing more blood, it may be a sign that something is wrong, so telephone your hospital or midwife straight away. A show indicates the cervix is starting to open and labour may follow quickly, or it may take a few days. Some women do not have a show. What happens when your waters break? Most women\u2019s waters break during labour, but it can also happen before labour starts. Your unborn baby develops and grows inside a bag of fluid called the amniotic sac. When it\u2019s time for your baby to be born, the sac breaks and the amniotic fluid drains out through your vagina. This is your waters breaking. You may feel a slow trickle, or a sudden gush of water that you cannot control. To prepare for this, you could keep a sanitary towel (but not a tampon) handy if you are going out and put a protective sheet on your bed. Amniotic fluid is clear and a pale straw colour. Sometimes it's difficult to tell amniotic fluid from urine. When your waters break, the water may be a little blood-stained to begin with. Tell your midwife immediately if the waters are smelly or coloured, or if you are losing blood, as this could mean you and your baby require urgent attention. If your waters break before labour starts, phone your midwife or the hospital for advice. Without amniotic fluid your baby is no longer protected and there is a risk of infection. How to cope when labour begins At the beginning of labour: You can be walking\/moving about if you feel like it. You can drink fluids and may find isotonic drinks (sports drinks) help keep your energy levels up. You can have a snack, although many women don\u2019t feel very hungry and some feel sick. As the contractions get stronger and more painful, you can try relaxation and breathing exercises \u2013 your birth partner can help by doing these with you. Your birth partner can rub your back as it can help relieve pain. You can read what happens during the actual birth. Page last reviewed: 19\/01\/2015 Next review due: 19\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 736 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 449  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts What happens during labour What to expect during labour and when your baby is born, including coping with contractions and how your baby is monitored When to go to hospital When to call the midwife and what to expect, including examinations and what the delivery rooms are like Pain relief in labour Techniques to help you cope, including relaxation, gas and air, a birthing pool or epidural What your birth partner can do Practical and emotional ways that your birth partner can help you during labour Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Maternity services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Related articles Healthy eating in pregnancy  Foods to avoid Choosing where to give birth  Pack your bag for birth Pain relief in labour Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked What the experts say Read the best practice guidelines from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for the care of women and their babies during labour and childbirth NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Epidural anaesthesia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Epidural-anaesthesia","content":"Epidural anaesthesia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Epidural anaesthesia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Epidural-anaesthesia Clinical trials Epidural anaesthesia Epidural-anaesthesia What it is used for Epidural-anaesthesia How it is performed Epidural-anaesthesia Side effects Introduction  Epidural anaesthesia, often referred to as \"an epidural\", is an injection in the back that numbs the nerves and stops you feeling pain. Areas that can be numbed by an epidural include the: chest abdomen pelvic area legs How an epidural works Anaesthetic medicine is injected into an area of the spine known as the epidural space. The anaesthetic works by numbing pain nerves as they enter the spinal cord. The extent of the numbness will depend on the type of drug used, and the amount injected. Once the medication has worn off, feeling in the affected areas will return. Read more about how an epidural is performed. When is an epidural used? An epidural can be used to provide pain relief in situations including: during childbirth during an operation, instead of a general anaesthetic after surgery that has been carried out under general anaesthetic Read more about why an epidural is used. This topic focuses mainly on having an epidural during labour and childbirth. Safety Epidurals have been routinely used for many years and are widely accepted as an effective method of pain relief after surgery, and during labour and childbirth. However, as with many medical procedures, there are some associated risks that, although small, you should be aware of before deciding whether to have an epidural. Two possible risks include: puncture of the dura \u2013 the toughest, outer layer surrounding the spinal cord and brain; the risk of the dura being punctured is about one in 100 nerve damage \u2013 which occurs only very rarely Read more about the side effects and complications of an epidural. Community content from HealthUnlocked Pain relief in labour Techniques to help you cope, including relaxation, gas and air, a birthing pool or epidural Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2015 Next review due: 02\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 102 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Pregnancy and baby guide Pain relief in labour General anaesthetic Caesarean section Local anaesthetic External links Which? Birth Choice The Royal College of Anaesthetists NCT: labour pain relief LabourPains.com: information for mothers Tommy's: pain relief options Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Find and choose services for Epidural anaesthesia Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy and baby guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Labyrinthitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Labyrinthitis","content":"Labyrinthitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Labyrinthitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Labyrinthitis Clinical trials Labyrinthitis Labyrinthitis Causes Labyrinthitis Diagnosis Labyrinthitis Treatment Introduction  Labyrinthitis is an inner ear infection. It causes a delicate structure deep inside your ear called the labyrinth to become inflamed, affecting your hearing and balance. The most common symptoms are dizziness, hearing loss (from mild to total loss of hearing) and vertigo \u2013 the sensation that you, or the environment around you, is moving. These symptoms can range from mild to severe, with some people feeling that they are unable to remain upright.  Other symptoms include: a feeling of pressure inside your ear(s) ringing or humming in your ear(s) (tinnitus) fluid or pus leaking out of your ear(s) ear pain feeling sick (nausea) or being sick a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above changes in vision, such as blurred vision or double vision mild headaches  Certain things can make the dizziness worse, including: colds or illness  the dark being in crowded areas or small rooms tiredness a women\u2019s period walking See your GP if you have these symptoms. You should also avoid driving, using tools and machinery, or working at heights if you're feeling dizzy. Treating labyrinthitis In most cases, the symptoms pass within a few weeks. Treatment involves a combination of bed rest and medication to help you cope better with the symptoms. You may need additional medication to fight the underlying infection, although antibiotics are not often required as the cause is most commonly due to a virus. Contact your GP if you do not notice any improvement after three weeks. You may need to be referred to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist. A small number of people have persistent symptoms that last for several months, or possibly years. This requires a more intensive type of treatment called vestibular rehabilitation therapy (VRT). Read more about treating labyrinthitis. The labyrinth The labyrinth is the innermost part of the ear. It contains two important parts: the cochlea \u2013 this relays sounds to the brain and is responsible for hearing the vestibular system \u2013 a complex set of fluid-filled channels that contributes to your sense of balance Inflammation of the labyrinth can disrupt your hearing and sense of balance, triggering the symptoms of labyrinthitis. The labyrinth usually becomes inflamed either because of: a viral infection, such as a cold or flu a bacterial infection, which is much less common Read more about the causes of labyrinthitis. Who gets labyrinthitis? Most cases of viral labyrinthitis occur in adults aged 30 to 60 years old. Viral labyrinthitis is relatively common in adults. Other types of ear infections are usually more widespread in children. Bacterial labyrinthitis is much less common. Younger children under two years old are more vulnerable to developing bacterial labyrinthitis. Complications of labyrinthitis Bacterial labyrinthitis carries a higher risk of causing permanent hearing loss, particularly in children who have developed it as a complication of meningitis. Because of this high risk, a hearing test is recommended following bacterial labyrinthitis. Severe hearing loss following bacterial labyrinthitis can sometimes be treated with a cochlear implant. This is not a conventional hearing aid, but a small electronic device fitted under the skin behind the ear during surgery. Read more information about hearing loss. Vestibular neuronitis Many people diagnosed with labyrinthitis only experience the balance symptoms without hearing loss. This is actually known as vestibular neuronitis rather than labyrinthitis. However, both terms are often used to describe the same diagnosis. Page last reviewed: 30\/01\/2015 Next review due: 30\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1108 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 587  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 280  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 135  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Labyrinthitis: Rebecca's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Rebecca has labyrinthitis, an inner ear infection. In this video, she describes how it affected her balance and perception, and where she found help. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Hearing loss Meningitis Vertigo How do I get a hearing aid on the NHS? Vestibular neuronitis Find services: hearing impairment and deaf support External links Brain & Spine Foundation: dizziness and balance problems Labyrinthitis.org.uk Vestibular Disorders Association Dizziness Dizziness is a common symptom that\u2019s not usually a sign of anything serious, but it should be checked out by a doctor Are you losing your hearing? Learn to spot signs that you are losing your hearing and what to do if you suspect you have hearing loss Find and choose services for Labyrinthitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lacerations","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cuts-and-grazes","content":"Cuts and grazes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cuts and grazes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cuts and grazes Introduction  Most cuts and grazes are minor and can be easily treated at home. Stopping the bleeding, cleaning the wound thoroughly and covering it with a plaster or dressing is usually all that's needed. Minor wounds should start to heal within a few days. This page covers: How to treat cuts and grazes When to get medical help When to go to accident and emergency (A&E) How to treat cuts and grazes Stop the bleeding Stop any bleeding before applying a dressing to the wound. Apply pressure to the area using a clean and dry absorbent material \u2013 such as a bandage, towel or handkerchief \u2013 for several minutes. If the cut is to your hand or arm, raise it above your head to help reduce the flow of blood. If the injury is to a lower limb, lie down and raise the affected area above the level of your heart. Clean the wound and apply a dressing When the wound has stopped bleeding, clean it and cover it with a dressing to help stop it becoming infected. To do this: wash and dry your hands thoroughly clean the wound under drinking-quality running tap water \u2013 avoid using antiseptic as it may damage the skin and slow healing pat the area dry with a clean towel apply a sterile adhesive dressing, such as a plaster \u2013 read more about how to apply plasters and other dressings Keep the dressing clean by changing it as often as necessary. Keep the wound dry by using waterproof dressings, which will allow you to take showers. You can remove the dressing after a few days, once the wound has closed itself. Take painkillers if needed If the wound is painful for the first few days, you can take over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. When to get medical help Call NHS 111 or visit your local walk-in centre, minor injuries unit or GP surgery if there's a risk your wound could become infected, or you think it's already infected. A wound is at risk of infection if: it has been contaminated with dirt, pus or other bodily fluids there was something in the wound before it was cleaned, such as gravel or a shard of glass it has a jagged edge it's longer than 5cm (2 inches) it was caused by an animal or human bite Signs a wound has become infected include: swelling, redness and increasing pain in the affected area pus forming in or around the wound feeling generally unwell a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above swollen glands under the chin or in the neck, armpits or groin An infected wound can usually be successfully treated with a short course of antibiotics. When to go to A&E Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible if: you cannot stop the bleeding you're bleeding from an artery \u2013 blood from an artery comes out in spurts with each beat of the heart, and is bright red and usually hard to control you experience persisting or significant loss of sensation near the wound or you're having trouble moving any body parts you have received a severe cut to the face \u2013 you may require urgent treatment to prevent scarring you have received a cut to the palm of your hand and it looks infected \u2013 these types of infection can spread quickly there's a possibility a foreign body is still inside the wound the wound is very large or the injury has caused a lot of tissue damage In A&E, your wound will be examined to determine whether there's any risk of infection. You may need a booster injection to prevent tetanus, and your wound may be closed with stitches, strips or special glue before a dressing is applied. If your wound is at risk of infection, it won't usually be closed because this may trap any infection inside. Instead, it will be packed with a non-sticky dressing before being covered with a protective dressing until it's safe to close. Page last reviewed: 21\/01\/2016 Next review due: 21\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 396 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 209  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Preventing accidents at home Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Katrina Phillips of the Child Accident Prevention Trust explains how to make your home childproof and prevent avoidable accidents. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Accidents to children in the home Animal and human bites First aid External links British Red Cross: first aid Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA): home safety St John Ambulance: cuts and grazes First aid What to do if someone is injured in an accident If your child has an accident How to deal with accidents and injuries, including cuts and broken bones NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/LDH","content":"Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview LDH Clinical trials LDH test Introduction  A lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test measures the amount of LDH in the blood. Lactate dehydrogenase is an enzyme that the body uses during the process of turning sugar into energy for your cells to use. LDH is found in many of the body's tissues and organs, including the muscles, liver, heart, pancreas, kidneys, brain and blood cells. The LDH test is mainly used to help identify the location and severity of tissue damage in the body. It's also sometimes used to monitor how far certain conditions have progressed including:  kidney disease liver disease some types of cancer In the past, LDH levels were also used to help diagnose and monitor heart attacks. However, other tests are now usually used to do this. Read more about the LDH test at Lab Tests Online UK. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 35 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Chronic kidney disease External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lactose intolerance","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lactose-intolerance","content":"Lactose intolerance - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lactose intolerance  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview lactose-intolerance Real stories lactose-intolerance Clinical trials Lactose intolerance lactose-intolerance Causes lactose-intolerance Diagnosis lactose-intolerance Treatment Introduction  Lactose intolerance is a common digestive problem where the body is unable to digest lactose, a type of sugar mainly found in milk and dairy products. Symptoms of lactose intolerance usually develop within a few hours of consuming food or drink that contains lactose. They may include: flatulence (wind) diarrhoea bloated stomach stomach cramps and pains stomach rumbling feeling sick The severity of your symptoms and when they appear depends on the amount of lactose you've consumed. Some people may still be able to drink a small glass of milk without triggering any symptoms, while others may not even be able to have milk in their tea or coffee. When to seek medical advice The symptoms of lactose intolerance can be similar to several other conditions, so it's important to see your GP for a diagnosis before removing milk and dairy products from your diet. For example, the symptoms above can also be caused by: irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) \u2013 a long-term disorder that affects the digestive system milk protein intolerance \u2013 an adverse reaction to the protein in milk from cows (not the same as a milk allergy) If your GP thinks you have lactose intolerance, they may suggest avoiding foods and drinks containing lactose for two weeks to see if your symptoms improve. Read more about diagnosing lactose intolerance. What causes lactose intolerance? The body digests lactose using a substance called lactase. This breaks down lactose into two sugars called glucose and galactose, which can be easily absorbed into the bloodstream. People with lactose intolerance don't produce enough lactase, so lactose stays in the digestive system where it's fermented by bacteria. This leads to the production of various gases, which cause the symptoms associated with lactose intolerance. Depending on the underlying reason why the body isn't producing enough lactase, lactose intolerance may be temporary or permanent. Most cases that develop in adults are inherited and tend to be lifelong, but cases in young children are often caused by an infection in the digestive system and may only last for a few weeks. Read more about the causes of lactose intolerance. Who's affected? In the UK, lactose intolerance is more common in people of Asian or African-Caribbean descent. Lactose intolerance can develop at any age. Many cases first develop in people aged 20 to 40, although babies and young children can also be affected. Is it an allergy? Lactose intolerance isn't the same as a milk or dairy allergy. Food allergies are caused by your immune system reacting to a certain type of food. This causes symptoms such as a rash, wheezing and itching. If you're allergic to something, even a tiny particle can be enough to trigger a reaction, while most people with lactose intolerance can still consume small amounts of lactose without experiencing any problems (although this varies from person to person). Treating lactose intolerance There's no cure for lactose intolerance, but limiting your intake of food and drink containing lactose usually helps to control the symptoms. Depending on what dairy products you're able to eat, you may also require additional calcium and vitamin D supplements to keep your bones strong and healthy. In some cases, your GP may refer you to a dietitian for further advice. In addition to dietary changes, lactase substitutes may also be helpful. These are drops or tablets you can take with your meals or drinks to improve your digestion of lactose. Read more about treating lactose intolerance. Complications of lactose intolerance Milk and other dairy products contain calcium, protein and vitamins such as A, B12 and D. Lactose also helps your body absorb a number of other minerals, such as magnesium and zinc. These vitamins and minerals are important for the development of strong, healthy bones. If you're lactose intolerant, getting the right amount of important vitamins and minerals can prove difficult. This may lead to unhealthy weight loss and put you at increased risk of developing the following conditions: Osteopenia \u2013 where you have a very low bone-mineral density. If osteopenia is not treated, it can develop into osteoporosis. Osteoporosis \u2013 where your bones become thin and weak. If you have osteoporosis, your risk of getting fractures and broken bones is increased. Malnutrition \u2013 when the food you eat doesn't give you the nutrients essential for a healthy functioning body. If you're malnourished, wounds can take longer to heal and you may start to feel tired or depressed. If you're concerned that dietary restrictions are putting you at risk of complications, you may find it helpful to consult a dietitian. They can advise you on your diet and whether you require food supplements. Your GP should be able to refer you to an NHS dietitian free of charge. Alternatively, you can contact a private dietician. The British Dietetic Association has information on how to find a private dietitian. Food allergy and intolerance myth buster There's much in the media about food allergies and intolerances, but what's the difference? And can you tell fact from fiction? Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 01\/04\/2016 Next review due: 01\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 604 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 274  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 157  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food and diet Food intolerances Vitamins and minerals Vitamins and your child External links British Dietetic Association Allergy UK: Lactose Intolerance Is it a food allergy or intolerance? Around 2% of people in the UK have a food allergy, but many more have a food intolerance Beat the bloat Tips for getting rid of bloating, including cutting out 'windy' foods and fizzy drinks, plus regular exercise 5 A DAY Whether you're cooking for a family or eating on the run, our tips and recipes can help you get your 5 A DAY NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Food allergy or intolerance?","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/allergies\/pages\/foodallergy.aspx","content":"Is it a food allergy or food intolerance? - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Food allergy or food intolerance? Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Allergies Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Around one or two people out of every 100 in the UK have a food allergy, but having a food intolerance is more common. How to tell the difference Food allergy: Symptoms come on within seconds or minutes of eating the food In extreme cases it can be life threatening Even a tiny trace of the food can cause a reaction It is easily diagnosed with tests Food intolerance: Symptoms come on more slowly, are long-lasting, and mainly involve the digestive system It's never life threatening A reasonable portion of food is usually needed to cause a reaction, although some people can be sensitive to small amounts  You may crave the problem food It's difficult to diagnose as there are only a few reliable tests Food allergies affect around 1 in 50 adults but are more common in younger children. It is estimated that around 1 in 12 children under the age of three have a food allergy. What is a food allergy? A food allergy is a rapid and potentially serious response to a food by your immune system. It can trigger classic allergy symptoms such as a rash, wheezing and itching. In rare cases the symptoms can be very severe and can cause potentially fatal breathing difficulties. This type of severe, potentially life-threatening allergic reaction is called anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis should be treated as a medical emergency. Causes of food allergies The most common food allergies among adults are to fish and shellfish and nuts, including peanuts, walnuts, hazelnuts and brazil nuts. Children often have allergies to milk and eggs as well as to peanuts, other nuts and fish.  What is a food intolerance? Food intolerances are more common than food allergies. In a recent UK survey around one in five adults reported having a food intolerance. The symptoms of food intolerance tend to come on more slowly, often many hours after eating the problem food. Typical symptoms include bloating and stomach cramps. It's possible to be intolerant to several different foods. This can make it difficult to identify which foods are causing the problem. It is often unclear why a person has an intolerance to a certain type of food. Food intolerances can also be difficult to tell apart from other digestive disorders that produce similar symptoms, such as inflammatory bowel disease, gastrointestinal obstructions or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). If you do have IBS you mind find that certain types of food, such as fried or fatty food, can trigger the onset of symptoms. Lactose intolerance Lactose intolerance, sometimes known as dairy intolerance, occurs when your body can't digest lactose. Lactose is in milk and dairy products such as yoghurts and soft cheeses. The main symptoms of lactose intolerance are diarrhoea and stomach pain. In most cases, your GP can diagnose lactose intolerance by looking at your symptoms and medical history. Could it be another type of food intolerance or condition? Sometimes it isn't clear which food is causing a problem. The only reliable way of identifying such a food intolerance is through an exclusion diet, where you cut out certain foods from your diet one at a time to see if there's an effect. Coeliac disease is a digestive condition where a person has an adverse reaction to gluten. However, coeliac disease is not an allergy or an intolerance to gluten. It is an autoimmune condition where the immune system mistakes substances found inside gluten as a threat to the body and attacks them. Gluten is a protein found in wheat, rye and barley that damages the intestine of people with coeliac disease. Symptoms include diarrhoea, bloating and weight loss. Coeliac disease can be accurately diagnosed with a blood test and biopsy. About 1 in 100 people in the UK have coeliac disease, but it's estimated that around half a million aren't diagnosed. Treatments for food allergy and food intolerance Always read food labels carefully, and learn where your problem food may be used as an ingredient in other foods. If you have a food allergy, you'll have to avoid the food you're allergic to. You may be able to eat the cooked versions without any problems, as can be the case with fruit or vegetable allergies. With lactose intolerance, you'll have to reduce the amount of dairy food that you eat. With other forms of food intolerance, you'll have to stop eating the food for a while, or possibly for life. With the autoimmune condition coeliac disease, you must avoid gluten for life. For more advice on your diet, ask your GP to refer you to an NHS dietitian. Page last reviewed: 16\/02\/2016 Next review due: 16\/02\/2018 More articles on: Living with allergy Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 331 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 101  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coeliac disease Food allergy Lactose intolerance 'Leaky gut' syndrome External links Coeliac UK Food Intolerance Awareness charity Allergy UK: Food Allergy or Food Intolerance Anaphylaxis Campaign Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Allergies GP Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Food allergy and intolerance myth buster There is much in the media about food allergies and intolerances, but what is the difference? And can you tell fact from fiction? Allergies Advice on allergies such as eczema and food allergy, and what treatments are available on the NHS Should you cut out bread from your diet? Find out how to combat wheat sensitivity with a special wheat-free, anti-bloat diet Food labels How to understand food labels and make healthier choices when you're shopping Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/lambert-eaton-myasthenic-syndrome","content":"Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome Introduction  Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is a rare disorder caused by a problem with the transmission of nerve signals to the muscles. It results in muscle weakness and sometimes dryness of the mouth, constipation and impotence. The immune system mistakenly attacks the nerve endings, which weakens the nerve impulses from the nerves to the muscles and prevents the muscles contracting (tightening) properly. In about 50% of people with LEMS, the disease is triggered by an underlying lung cancer (the type associated with smoking). These people usually develop the disease in middle age or later. There is no obvious trigger in the other 50% of patients with LEMS who don't have cancer. This form of the disease may start at any age. LEMS is estimated to affect between 1 in 250,000 and 1 in 333,000 people worldwide. It is also known as myasthenic syndrome or Eaton-Lambert syndrome. What are the symptoms?  Muscle weakness LEMS causes weakness and sometimes aching in the arm and leg muscles. This can make it difficult to climb stairs, get up from sitting, and lift objects or raise the arms. Very characteristically, people with LEMS have difficulty walking. They may describe this as \"like walking through treacle\". Strength may improve initially when exercising, only to lessen as exercise continues. The neck muscles can also be affected, making swallowing, chewing, speaking and even breathing difficult. Some people may struggle to keep their neck upright. A few people will have weakness of the eye muscles, resulting in drooping eyelids. Problems with the autonomic nervous system The autonomic nervous system is the nervous system in charge of automatic body functions we don't need to think about, such as breathing, sexual arousal and swallowing. When the nerves in the autonomic nervous system are affected, it may cause a wide range of symptoms, including a dry mouth, impotence, blurry vision, constipation and dizziness upon standing. Lung cancer In about 50% of patients, LEMS is associated with small cell lung cancer, an aggressive type of cancer that spreads quickly. Read about the symptoms of lung cancer. Very rarely, it may be associated with other forms of cancer. What is the cause? LEMS is caused by a problem with the immune system. The body releases antibodies to attack the nerve endings as if they were invading germs. Normally, nerve signals travel down the nerves and stimulate the nerve endings to release a chemical called acetylcholine. Acetylcholine comes into contact with the nearby muscle receptors, activating the receptors and causing the muscles to contract. When antibodies attack the nerve endings in LEMS, it decreases the amount of acetylcholine that is released. The nerve impulse from the nerve to the muscle isn't strong enough, so the muscle cannot properly contract and becomes weak. When someone with LEMS also has problems such as a dry mouth and blurred vision, it's because the nerves in the autonomic nervous system have been affected, too. LEMS is not inherited. How is it diagnosed? If you have any of the above symptoms, see your GP. They should look at your medical history and your symptoms, carry out a physical examination, and test your reflexes. The symptoms of LEMS are common in a number of different conditions. For example, it's very similar to another autoimmune condition called myasthenia gravis. This means you'll need to be referred to a neurologist (a specialist in nervous system disorders), who will carry out some tests. Blood test A special type of blood test can be used to detect the antibodies (proteins) that damage the nerve endings. These antibodies are not detectable in people without LEMS. Nerve conduction tests Electromyography is a procedure that can be used to identify communication problems between the nerves and muscles. It involves inserting a needle electrode through the skin into the muscle. This produces an electrical recording of the muscle activity. If you have LEMS, your muscles will not respond very well to the electrical stimulation. A nerve stimulation test is also used, and can show whether the transmission of signals between the nerve and muscle is poor. How is it treated? Anyone who has been diagnosed with LEMS must first be investigated for possible underlying cancer. If cancer is present, this needs to be treated. Removal of the cancer can significantly improve symptoms. LEMS cannot be cured, but the symptoms can be managed through a variety of approaches: by stimulating greater release of acetylcholine \u2013 through the use of 3,4-diaminopyridine by prolonging the activity of the acetylcholine that is released \u2013 with a drug called pyridostigmine by reducing the levels of the antibodies causing the condition \u2013 with steroids or immunosuppressant drugs You can also use intravenous immunoglobulin or plasma exchange to temporarily improve your condition while waiting for immunosuppressant drug therapy to become effective. These treatment options are covered below. Medication 3,4-diaminopyridine (DAP) tablets increase the release of acetylcholine from nerve cells. DAP is usually well tolerated and effective. It may be used in combination with pyridostigmine. Pyridostigmine tablets slow down the breakdown of acetylcholine. They can sometimes cause side effects, such as stomach cramps, muscle twitching, diarrhoea and nausea. Your doctor will be able to prescribe additional medication for you if you experience these. These medicines tend to work best in cases of mild LEMS. They can improve muscle contractions and strength in the affected muscles. They are always used as the first line of treatment. If these simple treatments are not effective in controlling symptoms, you may be tried on steroid tablets (prednisolone). Initially, a high dose is required to bring the condition under control, which may take many months. Such high doses can cause side effects (weight gain, high blood pressure, diabetes, cataracts, and osteoporosis). Learn more about the side effects of steroid medication. Doctors may prescribe an additional medication that suppresses the immune system, such as azathioprine or methotrexate. These are slow to act, but in the long term may allow you to reduce the dose of steroids and therefore reduce the risk of side effects. Regular blood monitoring is required for all people taking these immunosuppressants. All of these medications have associated side effects that your doctors will discuss with you. Plasmapheresis and immunoglobulin therapy Plasmapheresis or intravenous immunoglobulin therapy may be needed in very severe cases of LEMS, where a person has such severe muscle weakness that it is causing life-threatening breathing or swallowing problems. Plasmapheresis involves redirecting your blood through a machine, which removes the plasma that contains the harmful antibodies. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy means you're given an injection of normal antibodies from donated blood. This temporarily changes the way your immune system operates.  Both treatments can produce a rapid improvement in the symptoms of LEMS, but the benefits usually only last a few weeks. They are therefore not suitable as long-term treatments, and are usually only used to treat people who are seriously ill while they are waiting for other treatments to become effective. What's the outlook? Some people respond well to medication and are able to stop using all steroids when their symptoms stop (in remission), while continuing to take secondary immunosuppressant medication. In time \u2013 usually years \u2013 it may be possible for some patients to stop all immunosuppressant medication if they remain well. Others respond less well to medication and find the disease affects their everyday activities and quality of life. If there is no cancer, LEMS does not shorten life. But people with small cell lung cancer will have a shorter life expectancy because of the aggressive nature of the cancer. They can develop complications such as difficulty breathing, difficulty swallowing and pneumonia. Information about you If you have LEMS, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/12\/2014 Next review due: 09\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 19 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with disability Support for carers External links Muscular Dystrophy Association Myaware NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Laparoscopic cholecystectomy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Laparoscopiccholecystectomy","content":"Gallbladder removal  - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Gallbladder removal   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Laparoscopiccholecystectomy Real stories Laparoscopiccholecystectomy Clinical trials Gallbladder removal Laparoscopiccholecystectomy What happens Laparoscopiccholecystectomy Recovery Laparoscopiccholecystectomy Complications Introduction  Gallbladder removal surgery, also known as a cholecystectomy, is a very common procedure. The gallbladder is a small, pouch-like organ in the upper right part of your tummy. It stores bile, a fluid produced by the liver that helps break down fatty foods. You don't need a gallbladder, so surgery to take it out is often recommended if you develop any problems with it. Why does my gallbladder need to be removed? Surgery to remove the gallbladder is usually carried out if you have painful gallstones. These are small stones that can form in the gallbladder as a result of an imbalance in the substances that make up bile. Gallstones often cause no symptoms and you may not realise you have them, but occasionally they can block the flow of bile and irritate the gallbladder (acute cholecystitis) or pancreas (acute pancreatitis). This can cause symptoms such as: sudden and intense tummy pain feeling and being sick yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice) Very occasionally it may be possible to take tablets to dissolve gallstones, but surgery to remove the gallbladder is the most effective treatment in the vast majority of cases. What happens during gallbladder removal surgery There are two main ways of removing a gallbladder: laparoscopic (keyhole) cholecystectomy \u2013 several small cuts (incisions) are made in your tummy (abdomen) and fine surgical instruments are used to access and remove your gallbladder open cholecystectomy \u2013 a single, larger incision is made in your tummy to access and remove your gallbladder Keyhole surgery is used most often because you can leave hospital sooner, recover faster and are left with smaller scars than with an open procedure. Both techniques are performed under general anaesthetic, which means you'll be asleep during the operation and won't feel any pain while it's carried out. Read more about how gallbladder removal surgery is performed. Recovering from gallbladder removal surgery It doesn't usually take long to recover from keyhole surgery to remove your gallbladder. Most people can leave hospital the same day or the next morning. You'll probably be able to return to most of your normal activities within two weeks. It takes longer to recover from open surgery. You may need to stay in hospital for three to five days and it could be six to eight weeks before you're feeling back to normal. Read more about recovering from gallbladder removal surgery. Living without a gallbladder You can lead a perfectly normal life without a gallbladder. Your liver will still make enough bile to digest your food but, instead of being stored in the gallbladder, it drips continuously into your digestive system. You may have been advised to eat a special diet before surgery, but this doesn't need to be continued afterwards. Instead, you should aim to have a generally healthy, balanced diet. Some people experience problems such as bloating or diarrhoea after surgery, although this usually improves within a few weeks. If you notice certain foods or drinks trigger these symptoms, you may wish to avoid them in the future. Read more about your diet after gallbladder surgery. Risks of gallbladder removal surgery Gallbladder removal surgery is considered to be a safe procedure, but like any type of surgery there is a risk of complications. Possible complications include: wound infection bile leaking into the tummy damage to one of the openings (ducts) carrying bile out of the liver blood clots Speak to your surgeon about the benefits and risks of surgery before your operation. Read more about the complications of gallbladder removal surgery. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1401 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 820  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 341  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Illustration of the gallbladder Liver Gallbladder Bile duct Bile duct enters duodenum Stomach Useful links NHS Choices links Gallstones Having an operation Acute cholecystitis Acute pancreatitis External links Royal College of Surgeons: Recovering after gallbladder removal (PDF, 284kb) Questions about surgery It's important to know the details of any operation you're going to have. Find out what you should ask before having surgery Find and choose services for Gallbladder removal Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Laparoscopy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Laparoscopy","content":"Laparoscopy (keyhole surgery) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Laparoscopy (keyhole surgery)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Laparoscopy Clinical trials Laparoscopy Laparoscopy When it's used Laparoscopy How it's performed Introduction  Laparoscopy is a type of surgical procedure that allows a surgeon to access the inside of the abdomen (tummy) and pelvis without having to make large incisions in the skin. This procedure is also known as keyhole surgery or minimally invasive surgery. Large incisions can be avoided during laparoscopy because the surgeon uses an instrument called a laparoscope. This is a small tube that has a light source and a camera, which relays images of the inside of the abdomen or pelvis to a television monitor. The advantages of this technique over traditional open surgery include: a shorter hospital stay and faster recovery time less pain and bleeding after the operation reduced scarring When laparoscopy is used Laparoscopy can be used to help diagnose a wide range of conditions that develop inside the abdomen or pelvis. It can also be used to carry out surgical procedures, such as removing a damaged or diseased organ, or removing a tissue sample for further testing (biopsy). Laparoscopy is most commonly used in: gynaecology \u2013 the study and treatment of conditions affecting the female reproductive system gastroenterology \u2013 the study and treatment of conditions affecting the digestive system urology \u2013 the study and treatment of conditions affecting the urinary system Read more about when laparoscopy is used. How laparoscopy is carried out Laparoscopy is carried out under general anaesthetic, so you won't feel any pain during the procedure. During laparoscopy, the surgeon makes one or more small incisions in the abdomen. These allow the surgeon to insert the laparoscope, small surgical tools, and a tube used to pump gas into the abdomen. This makes it easier for the surgeon to look around and operate. After the procedure, the gas is let out of your abdomen, the incisions are closed using stitches and a dressing is applied. You can often go home on the same day of your laparoscopy, although you may need to stay in hospital overnight. Read more about how laparoscopy is performed. Safety Laparoscopy is a commonly performed procedure and serious complications are rare. Minor complications Minor complications are estimated to occur in one or two out of every 100 cases following laparoscopy. They include: infection minor bleeding and bruising around the incision feeling sick and vomiting Serious complications Serious complications after laparoscopy are estimated to occur in one out of every 1,000 cases. They include: damage to an organ, such as your bowel or bladder, which could result in the loss of organ function damage to a major artery complications arising from the use of carbon dioxide during the procedure, such as the gas bubbles entering your veins or arteries a serious allergic reaction to the general anaesthetic a blood clot developing in a vein, usually in one of the legs (deep vein thrombosis or DVT), which can break off and block the blood flow in one of the blood vessels in the lungs (pulmonary embolism) Further surgery is often required to treat many of these more serious complications. Page last reviewed: 24\/09\/2015 Next review due: 24\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 344 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 160  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 82  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Having an operation General anaesthetic Going into hospital External links RCOG: recovering from a laparoscopy Women's Health: laparoscopy Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Hospital admissions Find out what happens when you are admitted to hospital, including what forms to fill in or tests to undergo Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Laryngeal (larynx) cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-larynx","content":"Laryngeal (larynx) cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Laryngeal (larynx) cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-larynx Clinical trials Laryngeal cancer Cancer-of-the-larynx Causes Cancer-of-the-larynx Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-larynx Treatment Cancer-of-the-larynx Recovery Cancer-of-the-larynx Prevention Introduction  Laryngeal cancer is a type of cancer that affects the larynx (voice box). The larynx is part of the throat found at the entrance of the windpipe (trachea). It plays an important role in helping you breathe and speak. In the UK, there are about 2,400 new cases of laryngeal cancer each year. The condition is more common in people over the age of 60. It's about four times more common in men than women. Symptoms of laryngeal cancer The main symptoms of laryngeal cancer include: a change in your voice, such as sounding hoarse pain when swallowing or difficulty swallowing  a lump or swelling in your neck a long-lasting cough a persistent sore throat or earache in severe cases, difficulty breathing Some people may also experience bad breath, breathlessness, a high-pitched wheezing noise when breathing, unexplained weight loss, or fatigue (extreme tiredness). When to see your GP You should visit your GP if you have had any of the main symptoms listed above for more than three weeks. These symptoms are often caused by less serious conditions, such as laryngitis, but it's a good idea to get them checked out. If necessary, your GP can refer you to a hospital specialist for further tests to confirm or rule out cancer. Read more about diagnosing laryngeal cancer. What causes laryngeal cancer? It's not clear exactly what causes laryngeal cancer, but your risk of getting the condition is increased by: smoking tobacco regularly drinking large amounts of alcohol having a family history of head and neck cancer having an unhealthy diet exposure to certain chemicals and substances, such as asbestos and coal dust By adopting a healthy lifestyle, including avoiding alcohol and tobacco, you can significantly reduce your chances of developing laryngeal cancer. Read more about the causes of laryngeal cancer and preventing laryngeal cancer. How laryngeal cancer is treated The main treatments for laryngeal cancer are radiotherapy, surgery and chemotherapy. Radiotherapy or surgery to remove the cancerous cells from the larynx can often cure laryngeal cancer if it's diagnosed early. If the cancer is advanced, a combination of surgery to remove part or all of the larynx, radiotherapy and chemotherapy can be used. If you have surgery to remove your larynx, you'll no longer be able to speak or breathe in the usual way. Instead, you will breathe through a permanent hole in your neck (stoma) and you will need additional treatment to help restore your voice. This may include an implant in your throat, or an electrical device you hold against your throat to produce sound. Read more about treating laryngeal cancer and recovering from laryngeal cancer surgery. Outlook The outlook for laryngeal cancer depends on the extent of the cancer when it's diagnosed and treated. Fortunately, most laryngeal cancers are diagnosed at an early stage, which means the outlook is generally better than some other types of cancer. Overall, about 70 out of every 100 people will live for at least 5 years after diagnosis and about 60 out of every 100 people will live for at least 10 years. If you smoke, stopping smoking after being diagnosed with laryngeal cancer may improve your outlook. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 07\/08\/2015 Next review due: 07\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 135 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Find cancer support services Protect yourself against cancer Radiotherapy External links Cancer Laryngectomee Trust Cancer Research UK: laryngeal cancer Macmillan: laryngeal cancer National Association of Laryngectomee Clubs NHS Smokefree Stop smoking Help with quitting, including what your GP can do, local services and nicotine replacement therapies Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find cancer support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=Cancer","content":"Find Cancer information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Cancer information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Living with cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Cancer\/Pages\/Cancerhome.aspx","content":"Living with cancer - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Living with cancer Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Cancer, living with Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus One for the Boys: why do men not talk about cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Early cancer diagnosis is key, but that doesn't mean men always get checked out when they should. In this video, actors and sports personalities try to answer the question: Why are men so dumb when it comes to talking about cancer? All NHS Choices videos Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Preparing for your cancer test results If you're waiting for your cancer test results, here's how you can prepare for your consultation. Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a diagnosis and where to find support. Plus watch a video about one man's experience of cancer. Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your priority is medical care. But you can also get help in other areas of life. Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support. Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment. Living with lung cancer Practical advice for living with lung cancer, covering finances, feelings and controlling symptoms. Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions. 'I had breast cancer and then cervical cancer' Juanita explains the impact of cancer on her life, and how charity work helps others and brings her happiness. 'I beat testicular cancer' Former footballer Neil Harris talks about having testicular cancer, including his treatment and telling his family. Cancer: end of life care Information on coping with a terminal cancer diagnosis, including advice on counselling, practical issues and financial help. Talking to your kids about cancer Talking to children about your cancer may be difficult, but these tips can make it easier for you and them. Lung cancer myths and facts We separate the facts from the fiction about lung cancer and its link with smoking and other risk factors. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler talks about her experience of being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. 'I had prostate cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Philip Kissi didn't notice any symptoms. He talks about his diagnosis and treatment. 'My daughter Caron's breast cancer' TV star Caron Keating died from breast cancer in 2004. Her mother, Gloria Hunniford, explains how she coped. Getting started Why a balanced diet is important Keep skin safe in the sun Get help to stop smoking Cut down on your drinking Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Medical Oncology Information and support for mental health Renal units Alcohol addiction Stroke End of life hospice services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Bowel cancer self-assessment Do you have any symptoms? Mole self-assessment Find out if your moles need to be checked Also on NHS Choices Different types of cancer Breast cancer: female Breast cancer: male Bowel cancer Cervical cancer Lung cancer Skin cancer: malignant melanoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Common questions about cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines Breast cancer Information on breast changes to watch out for, plus breast cancer genes, breast reconstruction and mastectomy Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Laryngitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Laryngitis","content":"Laryngitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Laryngitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Laryngitis Clinical trials Laryngitis Laryngitis Causes Laryngitis Diagnosis Laryngitis Treatment Introduction  Laryngitis is inflammation of the larynx (voice box). In most cases, it gets better without treatment in about a week. Symptoms of laryngitis can begin suddenly and usually get worse over a period of two to three days. Common symptoms of laryngitis include: hoarseness difficulty speaking sore throat mild fever irritating cough a constant need to clear your throat The hoarse voice and speaking difficulties usually get worse each day you're ill and may last for up to a week after the other symptoms have gone. In a few cases, the larynx can swell and cause breathing difficulties. This isn't common in adults but can occur in young children who have smaller, narrower windpipes. Laryngitis is often linked to another illness, such as a cold, flu, throat infection (pharyngitis) or tonsillitis, so you might also have other symptoms such as: a headache swollen glands runny nose pain when swallowing feeling tired and achy When to seek medical help As laryngitis often gets better quickly without treatment, you normally only need to see your GP if the symptoms are particularly severe or they last longer than two weeks. You should seek immediate medical help if you or your child experience breathing difficulties. If you see your GP, they'll discuss the possible causes with you and may refer you for tests or to a specialist in hospital. Read more about diagnosing laryngitis. Why it happens In most cases, laryngitis is caused by either:  a viral infection \u2013 such as a cold or flu, or  damage to your larynx \u2013 usually by straining your voice In these cases, most of the symptoms usually pass within a week. This is known as acute laryngitis. Laryngitis can occasionally have other causes, such as smoking, alcohol misuse or an allergic reaction, and the symptoms can last much longer. This is known as chronic laryngitis. Read more about the causes of laryngitis. How laryngitis is treated Most cases of laryngitis get better without treatment within a week. To help your vocal cords heal, it's important not to smoke, to avoid smoky environments, drink plenty of fluids (particularly water) and try to rest your voice as much as possible. In some cases, it may be possible to treat the underlying cause of laryngitis. For example, if the symptoms are caused by an allergic reaction, you may be able avoid the substance you're allergic to, or take medication to help control your body's response to the substance. Read more about treating laryngitis. Can laryngitis be prevented? As laryngitis is often caused by a common viral infection, such as a cold or flu, it's not always possible to prevent it. However, you can reduce your risk of developing the condition by: making sure you have the annual flu vaccine (if recommended by your GP) practising good personal hygiene \u2013 such as washing your hands before and after eating and after using the toilet avoiding close contact with people who have respiratory infections, such as a cold or flu \u2013 particularly if you're prone to laryngitis avoiding irritants, such as smoke or dust \u2013 particularly if you have a cold or other respiratory tract infection not smoking not drinking more than the recommended limits of alcohol consumption not regularly clearing your throat \u2013 as this can irritate the larynx (try swallowing instead) raising your head with pillows when you're sleeping \u2013 to protect your larynx from any acid reflux from your stomach during sleep not shouting or singing loudly or for long periods of time \u2013 it's important for people who regularly use their voice excessively to receive proper training so they don't damage their larynx The larynx The larynx, or voice box, is a tube-like structure found at the entrance of the windpipe (trachea). The lump at the front of your throat, commonly known as the Adam\u2019s apple, is your larynx. The larynx has three main functions: it helps channel oxygen into your windpipe when you breathe it acts like a valve, closing off the windpipe when you swallow to prevent food or liquid entering your airways it contains the vocal cords which vibrate as air passes through them, producing the sound of your voice Page last reviewed: 08\/09\/2015 Next review due: 08\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1167 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 608  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 333  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 103  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Common cold Flu Epiglottitis Tonsillitis Sore throat Stop smoking Cold or flu? Find out about symptoms of colds and flu and how to stop the viruses spreading Winter health Tips and advice on how to stay healthy and well through the cold, dark days of winter Find and choose services for Laryngitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Laryngotracheitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Croup","content":"Croup - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Croup  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Croup Clinical trials Croup Croup Symptoms Croup Causes Croup Diagnosis Croup Treatment Croup Complications Introduction  Croup is a childhood condition that affects the windpipe (trachea), the airways to the lungs (the bronchi) and the voice box (larynx). Children with croup have a distinctive barking cough and will make a harsh sound, known as stridor, when they breathe in. They may also have a hoarse voice and find it difficult to breathe because their airway is blocked. Croup can usually be diagnosed by a GP and treated at home. However, if your child\u2019s symptoms are severe and they are finding it difficult to breathe, take them to the nearest hospital\u2019s accident and emergency (A&E) department. Read more about the symptoms of croup and diagnosing croup. Why does croup happen? Commonly, croup is caused by a virus. Several viruses can cause croup but in most cases it is the parainfluenza virus. Read more about the causes of croup. Who is affected by croup? Croup usually affects young children aged between six months and three years, with most cases occurring in one-year-olds.  However, croup can sometimes develop in babies as young as three months, and older children up to 15 years of age. Adults can also get croup but this is rare. The condition is more common during the late autumn and early winter months.  It tends to affect more boys than girls. A child may experience croup more than once during childhood. Treating croup Most cases of croup are mild and can be treated at home. Sitting your child upright and comforting them if they are distressed is important, because crying may make symptoms worse. Your child should also drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration. A single dose of an oral corticosteroid medication called dexamethasone or prednisolone will usually also be prescribed to help reduce the swelling in the throat. If your child has breathing problems they may need hospital treatment, such as adrenaline and oxygen through a mask. Read more about treating croup. Complications Most cases of croup clear up within 48 hours. However, in some cases symptoms can last for up to two weeks. It is extremely rare for a child to die from croup. There are a number of conditions that can follow croup, such as pneumonia and middle ear infection. Read more about the complications of croup. Preventing croup Croup is spread in a similar way to the common cold, so it is difficult to prevent. Good hygiene is the main defence against croup, such as regularly washing hands and cleaning surfaces. A number of your child's routine vaccinations also protect against some of the infections that can cause croup. These include: MMR \u2013 protection from measles, mumps and rubella DTaP\/IPV\/Hib \u2013 protection from diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, polio and Haemophilus influenzae type b Croup is a distinctive bark-like cough with a harsh sound known as stridor when breathing in   Community content from HealthUnlocked Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Page last reviewed: 28\/08\/2014 Next review due: 28\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 973 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 572  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 256  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 65  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Febrile seizures Seasonal flu Coughs, cold and ear infections How to spot a seriously ill baby Epiglottitis Cough Asthma Laryngitis External links Family Lives NCT: National Childbirth Trust Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor Infectious illnesses in children Symptoms to look out for if you're concerned your child may have an infectious childhood illness NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Laser hair removal","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/laser-hair-removal.aspx","content":"Laser hair removal Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Laser hair removal Laser hair removal is a cosmetic procedure that uses a powerful laser or 'intense pulsed light' (IPL) to remove unwanted hair. This light source heats and destroys hair follicles in the skin, which disrupts hair growth. Common areas to treat are the face, legs, arms, underarms and bikini line. It can be helpful for women with hirsutism (excessive hair growth). Generally, it's most effective on women with pale skin and dark hair, and doesn't work so well on women with dark skin.  Before you go ahead\u2026 Laser hair removal can be expensive, and has its limitations. Cost: In the UK, laser hair removal costs between £40 and £400, depending on the area of skin and number of sessions included. You may be recommended four to six sessions, spaced about four to six weeks apart. Limitations: The results of laser hair removal are not permanent. They usually last from weeks to months, and regular sessions may be needed to achieve and maintain the desired effect. There's no guarantee it will clear all the hair. Safety: Take time to find a reputable practitioner who is properly qualified and practises in a clean, safe and appropriate environment. Ask the practitioner what you should do if something were to go wrong. What it involves You\u2019ll need to shave the area of skin the day before your appointment. On the day, you\u2019ll wear specially designed goggles to protect your eyes during the procedure. Local anaesthetic isn\u2019t necessary. The practitioner usually applies a cool gel or cooling air spray to the area of skin. They then press a hand-held device to your skin and trigger the laser. This may feel like an elastic band snapping at your skin. Each session may take between 15 minutes to over an hour. The number of sessions needed depends on the area to be lasered and the system used.  Afterwards The area may be red with a raised rash for up to 24 hours afterwards. Holding an ice pack to the skin may help (try a pack of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel). Your skin will be more sensitive to the sun after laser hair removal. Avoid sun exposure and tanning beds for at least a week after treatment, and use sunscreen. On rare occasions, laser hair removal can result in: a crust or blister on your skin, which may take up to 10 days to heal  lightening or darkening of the skin for several months afterwards scarring excessive swelling, which may last up to seven days bruising, which may last up to 15 days burns a rare condition called livedo reticularis, where skin becomes mottled a skin reaction called erythema ab igne, caused by prolonged or repeated exposure to the laser or IPL What to do if you have problems If you're not happy with the results or are experiencing problems, take up the matter with your practitioner through the clinic where you were treated. If there are any complications that require medical attention, it is best that you go back to the practitioner who treated you. If this is not possible, you can go to your GP or local accident and emergency (A&E) department. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 0 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation Hirsutism  Save Face: find a practitioner for non-surgical cosmetic procedures  Tattoo removal Thinking of having a tattoo removed? Read this advice first... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lateral epicondylitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tennis-elbow","content":"Tennis elbow - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tennis elbow  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tennis-elbow Clinical trials Tennis elbow Tennis-elbow Symptoms Tennis-elbow Causes Tennis-elbow Treatment Tennis-elbow Prevention Introduction  Tennis elbow is a condition that causes pain around the outside of the elbow. It's clinically known as lateral epicondylitis. It often occurs after strenuous overuse of the muscles and tendons of the forearm, near the elbow joint. You may notice pain: on the outside of your upper forearm, just below the bend of your elbow when lifting or bending your arm when gripping small objects, such as a pen when twisting your forearm, such as turning a door handle or opening a jar You may also find it difficult to fully extend your arm. Read more about the symptoms of tennis elbow. What causes tennis elbow? The elbow joint is surrounded by muscles that move your elbow, wrist and fingers. The tendons in your elbow join the bones and muscles together, and control the muscles of your forearm. Tennis elbow is usually caused by overusing the muscles attached to your elbow and used to straighten your wrist. If the muscles and tendons are strained, tiny tears and inflammation can develop near the bony lump (the lateral epicondyle) on the outside of your elbow. As the name suggests, tennis elbow is sometimes caused by playing tennis. However, it is often caused by other activities that place repeated stress on the elbow joint, such as decorating or playing the violin. Pain that occurs on the inner side of the elbow is often known as golfer's elbow. Read more about the causes of tennis elbow. When to see your GP If your elbow pain is caused by a strenuous or repetitive activity, you should avoid the activity until your symptoms improve.  Visit your GP if the pain in your elbow persists, despite resting it for a few days. They will check for swelling and tenderness, and carry out some simple tests, such as asking you to extend your fingers and flex your wrist with your elbow extended. Further tests, such as an ultrasound scan or a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan will only be needed if it is thought that your pain is being caused by nerve damage. Treating tennis elbow Tennis elbow is a self-limiting condition, which means it will eventually get better without treatment. However, there are treatments that can be used to improve your symptoms and speed up your recovery. It's important that you rest your injured arm and stop doing the activity that's causing the problem. Holding a cold compress, such as a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a towel, against your elbow for a few minutes several times a day can help ease the pain. Taking painkillers, such as paracetamol, may help reduce mild pain caused by tennis elbow. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, can also be used to help reduce inflammation. Physiotherapy may be recommended in more severe and persistent cases. Massaging and manipulating the affected area may help relieve the pain and stiffness, and improve the range of movement in your arm. Surgery may be used as a last resort to remove the damaged part of the tendon. Most cases of tennis elbow last between six months and two years. However, in about nine out of 10 cases, a full recovery is made within a year. Read more about how tennis elbow is treated. Preventing tennis elbow It's not always easy to avoid getting tennis elbow, although not putting too much stress on the muscles and tendons surrounding your elbow will help prevent the condition getting worse. If your tennis elbow is caused by an activity that involves placing repeated strain on your elbow joint, such as tennis, changing your technique may alleviate the problem. Read more advice about preventing tennis elbow.  Tennis elbow is pain on the outside of the elbow  Who is affected by tennis elbow? Tennis elbow is a common musculoskeletal condition. It's estimated that as many as one in three people have tennis elbow at any given time. Each year in the UK, about five in every 1,000 people go to see their GP about tennis elbow. The condition usually affects adults and is more common in people who are 40-60 years of age. Men and women are equally affected. Sports injuries Read about what you can do to treat and prevent sports injuries, and when you should seek medical advice Page last reviewed: 27\/09\/2014 Next review due: 27\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1202 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 626  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 366  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 103  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bursitis Living with pain Running injuries Sports injuries Tendonitis External links Arthritis Research UK: elbow conditions CSP: sport-specific warm up advice Tips to prevent RSI Prevent repetitive strain injury (RSI), with tips on relaxation, checking your workstation, and adjusting your computer Find and choose services for Tennis elbow Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Laxatives","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Laxatives","content":"Laxatives - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Laxatives  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Laxatives Clinical trials Laxatives Laxatives Considerations   Laxatives are a type of medicine that can help you empty your bowels if you're having trouble going to the toilet. They're widely used to treat constipation if lifestyle changes, such as increasing the amount of fibre in your diet, drinking plenty of fluid and taking regular exercise, haven't helped. Laxatives are available over-the-counter, without a prescription, from pharmacies and supermarkets. This topic covers: Types of laxatives Which laxative should I use? Things to consider How to take laxatives How long should laxatives be used for? Side effects Alternatives Types of laxatives The main laxatives used in the UK are: bulk-forming laxatives \u2013 such as ispaghula husk and methylcellulose, which work in the same way as dietary fibre; they increase the bulk of your stools (faeces) by helping them retain fluid, encouraging your bowels to push the stools out osmotic laxatives \u2013 such as lactulose and polyethylene glycol, which soften your stools and make them easier to pass by increasing the amount of water in your bowels stimulant laxatives \u2013 such as bisacodyl, senna and sodium picosulfate, which speed up the movement of your bowels by stimulating the nerves that control the muscles lining your digestive tract stool softener laxatives \u2013 such as arachis oil and docusate sodium, which increase the fluid content of hard, dry stools, making them easier to pass There are also a number of alternative laxatives that are less commonly used, including bowel cleansing solutions, peripheral opioid-receptor antagonists, linaclotide and prucalopride. Which laxative should I use? Although laxatives have been around for a long time, there's a lack of high-quality evidence about exactly how effective they are and whether certain laxatives are better than others. Unless there's a reason why specific laxatives may be more suitable than others (see below), most adults should try using a bulk-forming laxative first. These usually start to work after about two or three days. If your stools remain hard, try using an osmotic laxative in addition to \u2013 or instead of \u2013 a bulk-forming laxative. If your stools are soft, but are still difficult to pass, try taking a stimulant laxative in addition to a bulk-forming laxative. Osmotic laxatives usually start to work after about two or three days, while stimulant laxatives usually have an effect within six to 12 hours. Speak to your GP or pharmacist if you're unsure which laxative to use. Also see your GP if you're still constipated after trying all of the different types of laxative, or if you think your child might benefit from taking laxatives. Things to consider Although laxatives are available over-the-counter, they're not suitable for everyone. Laxatives aren't usually recommended for children, unless advised by a doctor, and some types of laxatives may not be safe to use if you have certain conditions, such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis. Before using laxatives, carefully read the patient information leaflet that comes with the medication to make sure it's safe for you to take. Read more about the considerations regarding laxatives. How to take laxatives How you take laxative medication depends on the form it comes in, they are commonly available as: tablets or capsules you swallow sachets of powder you mix with water and then drink suppositories \u2013 a capsule you place inside your back passage (rectum), where it will dissolve liquids or gels that you place directly into your back passage Some laxatives are also designed to be taken at certain times of the day, such as first thing in the morning or last thing at night. Read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medication so you know how to take it properly. Ask your pharmacist for further advice if you're still not sure how to take your medication. While taking bulk-forming or osmotic laxatives it's particularly important to stay well hydrated by drinking plenty of fluids. This is because these laxatives can cause dehydration. Never take more than the recommended dose of laxatives because this can be harmful and cause troublesome side effects (see below). How long should laxatives be used for? Ideally, laxatives should only be used occasionally and for short periods of time. Stop taking a laxative when your constipation improves. After taking a laxative, to help stop constipation returning you can make certain lifestyle changes, such as drinking plenty of water, exercising regularly and including more fibre in your diet. These types of measures are a better way of preventing constipation than excessive use of laxatives. See your GP for advice if you're often constipated, despite making appropriate lifestyle changes, or if your constipation hasn't improved after taking laxatives for more than a week. Don't get into the habit of taking laxatives every day to ease your constipation because this can be harmful. In some cases, you may be prescribed a laxative to use regularly, but this should always be supervised by your GP or a gastroenterologist (a specialist in digestive conditions). Side effects Like most medications, laxatives can cause side effects. They're usually mild and should pass once you stop taking the medication. The side effects you may experience will depend on the specific medication you're taking, but common side effects of most laxatives include: bloating passing wind (flatulence)  painful tummy (abdominal) cramps feeling sick dehydration \u2013 which can make you feel lightheaded, have headaches and pass urine that's darker than normal Contact your GP for advice if you experience any particularly troublesome or persistent side effects while taking laxatives. Excessive or prolonged use of laxatives can also cause diarrhoea, intestinal obstruction (where the bowel becomes blocked by large, dry stools) and unbalanced levels of salts and minerals in your body. Alternatives It's often possible to improve constipation without having to use laxatives. Before trying laxatives, it may help to make a number of lifestyle changes, such as: increasing your daily intake of fibre \u2013 you should eat about 30g of fibre a day; high-fibre foods include fruit, vegetables and cereals adding bulking agents, such as wheat bran, to your diet \u2013 these will help make your stools softer and easier to pass, although bran and fibre can sometimes make bloating worse drinking plenty of water exercising regularly Read more about preventing constipation. Reporting side effects The Yellow Card Scheme allows you to report suspected side effects from any type of medicine you're taking. It's run by the UK medicines safety watchdog \u2013 the Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). Page last reviewed: 20\/06\/2016 Next review due: 20\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 348 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 117  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Foods for good digestion Medicines information Pharmacy and medicines Water and drinking External links NICE: constipation in children and young people NICE: laxatives The IBS Network Constipation Constipation is where you're not passing stools regularly or you're unable to completely empty your bowel Digestive health Find out how to beat common digestive problems like bloating and indigestion How to get more fibre into your diet Most people need to eat more fibre. Find out which foods are high in fibre and how to include more in your diet NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Constipation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Constipation","content":"Constipation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Constipation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Constipation Clinical trials Constipation Constipation Symptoms Constipation Causes Constipation Diagnosis Constipation Treatment Constipation Complications Constipation Prevention Introduction  Constipation is a common condition that affects people of all ages. It can mean that you're not passing stools regularly or you're unable to completely empty your bowel. Constipation can also cause your stools to be hard and lumpy, as well as unusually large or small. The severity of constipation varies from person to person. Many people only experience constipation for a short time, but for others, constipation can be a long-term (chronic) condition that causes significant pain and discomfort and affects quality of life. Read more about the symptoms of constipation. What causes constipation? It's often difficult to identify the exact cause of constipation. However, there are a number of things that contribute to the condition, including: not eating enough fibre, such as fruit, vegetables and cereals a change in your routine or lifestyle, such as a change in your eating habits ignoring the urge to pass stools side effects of certain medications not drinking enough fluids anxiety or depression In children, poor diet, fear about using the toilet and problems toilet training can all lead to constipation. Read more about the causes of constipation. Who's affected Constipation can occur in babies, children and adults. It's estimated that around one in every seven adults and up to one in every three children in the UK has constipation at any one time. The condition affects twice as many women as men and is also more common in older adults and during pregnancy. When to see your GP You may be able to treat constipation yourself by making simple changes to your diet and lifestyle (see below). If these changes don't help and the problem continues, you should see your GP. Also speak to your GP if you think your child might be constipated. Read more about diagnosing constipation. Treating constipation Diet and lifestyle changes are usually recommended as the first treatment for constipation. This includes gradually increasing your daily intake of fibre, making sure you drink plenty of fluids, and trying to get more exercise. If these aren't effective, your GP may prescribe an oral laxative medication that can help you empty your bowels. Treatment for constipation is effective, although in some cases it can take several months before a regular bowel pattern is re-established. Read more about treating constipation. Preventing constipation Making the diet and lifestyle changes mentioned above can also help to reduce your risk of developing constipation in the first place. Giving yourself enough time and privacy to pass stools comfortably may also help, and you should try not to ignore the urge to go to the toilet. Read more about preventing constipation. Complications For most people constipation rarely causes complications, but people with long-term constipation can develop: haemorrhoids (piles) faecal impaction (where dry, hard stools collect in the rectum) bowel incontinence (the leakage of liquid stools) Read more about the complications of constipation. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/12\/2015 Next review due: 24\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 764 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 235  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 211  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 139  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Digestive health Foods for good digestion Haemorrhoids Irritable bowel syndrome Laxatives External links British Nutrition Foundation Education and Resources for Improving Childhood Continence (ERIC) The IBS Network Digestive health Find out how to beat common digestive problems like bloating and indigestion Eat right for your digestion How to eat and drink to ensure good digestion, including the foods to avoid and which ones to fill up on Five top tips for a healthy tummy Five ways to banish common digestive problems such as heartburn, constipation and bloating NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lazy eye","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lazy-eye","content":"Lazy eye - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lazy eye (amblyopia)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lazy-eye Clinical trials Lazy eye Lazy-eye Causes Lazy-eye Diagnosis Lazy-eye Treatment   A lazy eye (amblyopia) is a childhood condition where the vision in one eye doesn't develop properly.  This usually means that the child can see less clearly out of the affected eye and relies more on the \"good\" eye. An estimated 1 in 30 to 1 in 50 children will develop a lazy eye. The condition is usually diagnosed around the age of four. Lazy eye can sometimes affect both eyes, although this is rare. How do I know if my child has a lazy eye? A lazy eye doesn't usually cause symptoms. Younger children are often unaware that there's anything wrong with their vision and, if they are, they're usually unable to explain what's wrong. Older children may complain that they can't see as well through one eye and have problems with reading, writing and drawing. In some cases, you may notice that one eye looks different from the other. However, this is usually a sign of another condition that could lead to a lazy eye, such as: a squint \u2013 where the weaker eye looks inwards, outwards, upwards or downwards, while the other eye looks forwards refractive errors \u2013 where a person is either short-sighted (myopia) or long-sighted (hyperopia) childhood cataracts \u2013 cloudy patches that develop in the lens, which is located behind the clear layer of tissue at the front of the eye (cornea)  One way to check your child's eyes is to cover each eye with your hand, one at a time. They might object to covering the good eye, but they might not mind if you cover the lazy eye. If they try to push your hand away from one eye but not the other, it may be a sign they can see better out of one eye. When to seek medical advice Lazy eye is often diagnosed during routine eye tests before parents realise there's a problem.  Children should have their eyes tested once they're old enough to attend a sight test, which is usually after they are 3.5 years old. It's difficult to treat lazy eye after the age of 4.5, so it's a good idea for children to have an eye test between the ages of 3.5 and 4.5. However, visit your GP if you have any concerns about your child's eyesight. If necessary, they can refer your child to an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) for further testing. Read more about diagnosing a lazy eye. What causes a lazy eye? The eyes work like a camera. Light passes through the lens of each eye and reaches a light-sensitive layer of tissue at the back of the eye called the retina. The retina translates the image into nerve signals that are sent to the brain. The brain combines the signals from each eye into a three-dimensional image. A lazy eye occurs when the brain connections responsible for vision aren't made properly. This can be the result of: a reduction in the amount of light entering the eye a lack of focus in the eye confusion between the eyes \u2013 where the two images aren't the same (such as a squint) Left untreated, this can lead to the eye's central vision never reaching normal levels. Read more about the causes of a lazy eye. Treating a lazy eye In most cases it is possible to treat a lazy eye, usually in two stages. The underlying problem is first corrected using glasses to correct the focus of the eye, which often helps to correct a squint as well. The child is then encouraged to use the affected eye again. This can be done using an eye patch to cover the stronger eye, or eye drops to temporarily impair the vision in the stronger eye. Treatment is often effective, but it's a gradual process that takes many months to work. Read more about treating a lazy eye. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/06\/2016 Next review due: 16\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 96 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Sight tests for children Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out when children need eye tests, what the test involves and why it's important. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Eye tests for children Long-sightedness Short-sightedness Squint External links Look after your eyes: lazy eye Moorfields Eye Hospital: information for children and young people Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery Find and choose services for Lazy eye Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"LDH","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/LDH","content":"Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview LDH Clinical trials LDH test Introduction  A lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test measures the amount of LDH in the blood. Lactate dehydrogenase is an enzyme that the body uses during the process of turning sugar into energy for your cells to use. LDH is found in many of the body's tissues and organs, including the muscles, liver, heart, pancreas, kidneys, brain and blood cells. The LDH test is mainly used to help identify the location and severity of tissue damage in the body. It's also sometimes used to monitor how far certain conditions have progressed including:  kidney disease liver disease some types of cancer In the past, LDH levels were also used to help diagnose and monitor heart attacks. However, other tests are now usually used to do this. Read more about the LDH test at Lab Tests Online UK. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 35 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Chronic kidney disease External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leaky gut syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/leaky-gut-syndrome","content":"\"Leaky gut syndrome\" - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories \"Leaky gut syndrome\"  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview leaky-gut-syndrome Clinical trials Leaky gut syndrome Introduction  \"Leaky gut syndrome\" is a proposed condition some health practitioners claim is the cause of a wide range of long-term conditions, including chronic fatigue syndrome and multiple sclerosis (MS). Proponents of \"leaky gut syndrome\" claim that many symptoms and conditions are caused by the immune system reacting to germs, toxins or other substances that have been absorbed into the bloodstream via a porous (\"leaky\") bowel. While it's true that some conditions and medications can cause a \"leaky\" gut (what scientists call increased intestinal permeability), there is currently little evidence to support the theory that a porous bowel is the direct cause of any significant, widespread problems. There is also little evidence that the \"treatments\" some people claim help to reduce bowel \"leakiness\", such as nutritional supplements and herbal remedies, have any beneficial effect for most of the conditions they supposedly help. What can cause a \"leaky\" bowel? The inside of the bowel is lined by a single layer of cells that make up the mucosal barrier (the barrier between the inside of the gut and the rest of the body). This barrier is effective at absorbing nutrients, but prevents most large molecules and germs passing from inside the bowel into the bloodstream and potentially causing widespread symptoms. In some circumstances, this barrier can become less effective and \"leaky\", although this in itself is not generally thought to be sufficient to cause serious problems. Alcohol and certain painkillers Alcohol, aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen are well-known irritants of the bowel lining. They can damage the seals between cells, allowing some substances to pass through the gaps and into the bloodstream. Gastroenterologists (specialists in gut conditions) generally agree that these irritants don't usually cause anything more than just mild inflammation of a particular area of the bowel. This will usually cause no obvious symptoms and will improve over time if you stop taking the medication or stop drinking alcohol. At the very worst, the inflammation might be bad enough to occasionally cause ulcers in the bowel lining. Certain conditions and treatments The following conditions and treatments can also damage the seals in the bowel lining: inflammatory bowel diseases \u2013 such as Crohn's disease infections of the intestines \u2013 such as salmonella, norovirus and giardiasis  coeliac disease  chemotherapy medicines chronic kidney disease   radiotherapy to the abdomen (tummy) immunosuppressants (medicines that weaken the immune system) HIV\/AIDS  cystic fibrosis   type 1 diabetes sepsis complicated surgery Generally, even in these situations treatment for a \"leaky\" bowel isn\u2019t necessary. However, under certain circumstances people with Crohn's disease, for example, may benefit from a liquid diet to reduce bowel inflammation, which also improves the \u201Cleaky\u201D bowel (read more about treating Crohn's disease). The \"leaky gut syndrome\" theory Exponents of \"leaky gut syndrome\" \u2013 largely nutritionists and practitioners of complementary and alternative medicine \u2013 believe the bowel lining can become irritated and \"leaky\" as the result of a much wider range of factors, including an overgrowth of yeast or bacteria in the bowel, a poor diet and the overuse of antibiotics. They believe that undigested food particles, bacterial toxins and germs can pass through the \"leaky\" gut wall and into the bloodstream, triggering the immune system and causing persistent inflammation throughout the body. This, they say, is linked to a much wider range of health problems, including: food allergies  migraine  tiredness and chronic fatigue syndrome   asthma  lupus, rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis (MS) skin conditions such as scleroderma and eczema autism  However, there is currently little evidence to suggest these conditions are in fact caused by having a \"leaky\" gut. Promoted products Many different \"treatments\" have been suggested by people who promote the idea of \"leaky gut syndrome\", including diet books, nutritional supplements (containing probiotics, for example), herbal remedies, gluten-free foods and other special diets, such as a low FODMAP, low sugar or antifungal diet. However, you should be wary of treatments offered by people who claim to be able to \"cure\" \"leaky gut syndrome\", as there is little scientific evidence to suggest they are beneficial for many of the conditions they are claimed to help. Some people even promote various nutritional \"treatments\" for autism, despite conflicting evidence and a recommendation from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) that special diets shouldn't be used to treat the main symptoms of the condition. Some of the dietary changes suggested for \u201Cleaky gut syndrome\u201D (such as a low FODMAP diet) can help people with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), but these seem to work irrespective of the presence of a \u201Cleaky\u201D gut. Generally, eliminating foods from the diet is not a good idea unless it's strictly necessary (for example, if you have coeliac disease) and done on the advice of a healthcare professional, as it can lead to nutritional deficiencies.  Advice and further information If you have symptoms that are not explained by a diagnosis, it may help to read the topic on medically unexplained symptoms. Such mystery symptoms are surprisingly common, accounting for up to a fifth of all GP consultations in the UK.  If you have been diagnosed with a particular health condition, you can look it up in our A-Z index of treatments and conditions, where you will find reliable, evidence-based information about its treatment. Generally, it is wise to view \"holistic\" and \"natural health\" websites with scepticism \u2013 do not assume that the information they provide is correct or based on scientific facts or evidence. Page last reviewed: 26\/02\/2015 Next review due: 26\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 826 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 523  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links How's your gut? Inflammatory bowel disease Side effects of NSAIDs How to treat common digestive disorders Digestive complaints such as constipation, diarrhoea, heartburn and bloating are incredibly common but usually treatable Supplements: do you need them? Millions of us use supplements and vitamin pills, but are they doing us any good? NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Learning disabilities","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Childrenwithalearningdisability\/Pages\/Childrenwithalearningdisabilityhome.aspx","content":"Learning disability - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Learning disability Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Learning disabilities Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Help your child learn Follow these expert tips to help your child reach their potential if they have a learning disability. What is a learning disability? Find out what a learning disability is and what it means for the estimated 1.5m people who have one. Learning disabilities: coping with a diagnosis How a learning disability is diagnosed, and sources of support if you are told your child has one. Learning disabilities: coping with challenging behaviour Find out about possible causes for challenging behaviour, where to get help and how to cope. 'My children teach me the art of patience' Find out how Deborah supports her children, who have autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and Down's syndrome. Teaching your child good eating skills Get tips on mealtimes for kids with learning disabilities, including how to help your child to participate. Special educational needs (SEN) Information about the support available to meet special educational needs, in or out of school. 'My daughter and Down's syndrome' Monica Rivers describes family life with her six-year-old daughter Ayesha, who has Down's syndrome. Learning disabilities: Annual Health Checks Adults with learning disabilities need more health support to prevent their medical conditions going undetected. Going into hospital with a learning disability If someone has a significant learning disability, these 10 steps can help make their hospital visits a success. Managing weight with a learning disability If you care for a person with a learning disability, you can help them to achieve a healthy weight. 'My learning disability' Sinead, 25, a charity worker, has a learning disability. She describes the support she receives in her job and from her family. 'My life with Asperger syndrome' Michael Cooke, 22, talks about his life with Asperger syndrome, his job at an arts centre and his ambitions. Getting started Easyhealth: healthcare leaflets (easy read) Find services that support independent living Support for people with care needs Financial support if you or your child has a disability Mencap: local support groups Netmums: special needs and disabilities support Caring for a disabled child Caring for a child with complex needs GOV.UK: to help you stop getting flu (Easyread leaflet) Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Assessment and diagnosis for autism Carers Children's & Adolescent Services GP Learning disabilities Parenting information and support services Respite and breaks for carers Support for independent living Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Also on NHS Choices Autism spectrum disorder Cerebral palsy Down's syndrome Epilepsy Rett syndrome Your adopted child's health needs Children who are adopted from care may have special needs resulting from physical, mental or emotional problems or learning disabilities Talking to your child about their autism Dr Glòria Durà-Vilà explains why it's important for a child to learn about their autism diagnosis from a parent in a safe environment Special needs in children If your child has a health condition or disability, they may need specialised healthcare and help at school Caring and communication difficulties The person you're caring for may develop communication issues as a result of a physical condition. Find out how you can get support Bullying: advice for parents Bullying is a concern for many parents and carers. Find out what you can do to help your child NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leg cramps","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/legcrampsunknowncause","content":"Leg cramps - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Leg cramps  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview legcrampsunknowncause Clinical trials Leg cramps legcrampsunknowncause Symptoms legcrampsunknowncause Causes legcrampsunknowncause Treatment Introduction  Leg cramps are a common and usually harmless condition where the muscles in your leg suddenly become tight and painful. It usually occurs in the calf muscles, although it can affect any part of your leg, including your feet and thighs. After the cramping has passed, you may have pain and tenderness in your leg for several hours. Three out of four cases occur at night during sleep. Read more about the symptoms of leg cramps. What causes leg cramps? Leg cramps can occur for no apparent reason, known as idiopathic leg cramps, or as a symptom or complication of a health condition, known as secondary leg cramps. Causes of secondary leg cramps can include: pregnancy exercise  certain types of medication, such as statins (medicines that help lower cholesterol levels) liver disease During a cramp, your muscles suddenly contract (shorten), causing pain in your leg. This is known as a spasm, and you cannot control the affected muscle. The cramp can last from a few seconds to 10 minutes. When the spasm passes, you will be able to control the affected muscle again. Read more about the causes of leg cramps. When to see your GP Speak to your GP if your leg cramps are affecting your quality of life; for example, if you have frequent leg cramps or they are interfering with your sleep. Your GP will ask about your symptoms and examine your legs and feet. They may also ask if you have other symptoms, such as numbness or swelling, which may be a sign that you have secondary leg cramps caused by an underlying condition. In this case, you may need further tests, such as blood tests and urine tests, to rule out other conditions.   Treating leg cramps Most cases of leg cramps can be relieved by exercising the affected muscles. Exercising your legs during the day will often help reduce how often you get cramping episodes. Stretches To stretch your calf muscles, stand with the front half of your feet on a step, with your heels hanging off the edge. Slowly lower your heels so that they are below the level of the step. Hold for a few seconds before lifting your heels back up to the starting position. Repeat a number of times. Medication is usually only needed in the most persistent cases where cramping does not respond to exercise. If you have secondary leg cramps, treating the underlying cause may help relieve your symptoms. Leg cramps that occur during pregnancy should pass after the baby is born. Treating cramps that occur as a result of serious liver disease can be more difficult. Your treatment plan may include using medications such as muscle relaxants. Read more about treating leg cramps Preventing leg cramps If you often get leg cramps, regularly stretching the muscles in your lower legs may help prevent the cramps or reduce their frequency. You might find it useful to stretch your calves before you go to bed each night (see stretching advice above or try this post-exercise calf stretch). The following night-time advice may also help: If you lie on your back, make sure that your toes point upwards \u2013 placing a pillow on its side at the end of your bed, with the soles of your feet propped up against it may help keep your feet in the right position.  If you lie on your front, hang your feet over the end of the bed \u2013 this will keep your feet in a relaxed position and help stop the muscles in your calves from contracting and tensing. Keep your sheets and blankets loose. If you have leg cramps, the muscles in your leg will suddenly become tight and painful  Who is affected by leg cramps? It is difficult to estimate exactly how common leg cramps are because most people do not report their symptoms to their GP. Two groups of people particularly affected by leg cramps are: adults over 60 \u2013 it is thought that a third of people over 60 experience leg cramps; about 40% of these have three or more cramps a week pregnant women \u2013 about a third of pregnant women have leg cramps, usually during the last trimester of pregnancy (week 27 to the birth) However, people of all ages, including children, have reported having leg cramps. Both men and women are equally affected. Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Page last reviewed: 11\/09\/2014 Next review due: 11\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2375 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 916  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 719  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 251  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 147  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 342  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Common health problems in pregnancy Easy exercises Men's health 60-plus Sports injuries Women's health 60-plus External links MHRA: recommendations for quinine use How to stretch after a run Stretching exercises to do after a run to gradually cool down and improve your flexibility Men's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information for men aged 60 and over Women's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information and advice for women aged 60 and over NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leg ulcer, venous","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leg-ulcer-venous","content":"Venous leg ulcer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Venous leg ulcer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leg-ulcer-venous Clinical trials Venous leg ulcer Leg-ulcer-venous Symptoms Leg-ulcer-venous Causes Leg-ulcer-venous Diagnosis Leg-ulcer-venous Treatment Leg-ulcer-venous Prevention Introduction  A leg ulcer is a long-lasting (chronic) sore that takes more than four to six weeks to heal. They usually develop on the inside of the leg, just above the ankle. The symptoms of a venous leg ulcer include pain, itching and swelling in the affected leg. There may also be discoloured or hardened skin around the ulcer, and the sore may produce a foul-smelling discharge. See your GP if you think you have a leg ulcer, as it will need specialist treatment to help it heal. Your GP will examine your leg and may carry out additional tests to rule out other conditions. Read more about how a venous leg ulcer is diagnosed. What causes venous leg ulcers? A venous leg ulcer is the most common type of leg ulcer, accounting for over 90% of all cases. Venous leg ulcers can develop after a minor injury, where persistently high pressure in the veins of the legs has damaged the skin. Read more about the causes of venous leg ulcers. Who's affected? Venous leg ulcers are estimated to affect around 1 in 500 people in the UK, although they become much more common with age. It's estimated that around 1 in 50 people over the age of 80 has one. You're more at risk of developing one if you've previously had deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or find it difficult to walk because of a problem such as: osteoarthritis a leg injury obesity paralysis You're also more at risk if you've recently had an operation on your leg, such as a hip replacement or knee replacement. People with varicose veins (swollen and enlarged veins) also have a higher risk of developing venous leg ulcers. How venous leg ulcers are treated Most venous leg ulcers heal within three to four months if they're treated by a healthcare professional trained in compression therapy for leg ulcers. However, some ulcers may take longer to heal, and a very small number never heal. Treatment usually involves: cleaning and dressing the wound using compression, such as bandages or stockings, to improve the flow of blood in the legs Antibiotics may also be used if the ulcer becomes infected, but they don't help ulcers to heal. However, unless the underlying cause of the ulcer is addressed, there's a high risk of a venous leg ulcer recurring after treatment. Underlying causes could include immobility, obesity, previous DVT, or varicose veins. Read more about treating venous leg ulcers. Can venous leg ulcers be prevented? There are several ways to help prevent a venous leg ulcer in people at risk, such as:  wearing compression stockings losing weight if you're overweight exercising regularly elevating your leg when possible This is particularly important if you've previously had a leg ulcer \u2013 once a leg has suffered a venous ulcer, you're at risk of further ulcers developing within months or years. Read more about preventing venous leg ulcers. Other types of leg ulcer Other common types of leg ulcer include: arterial leg ulcers \u2013 caused by poor blood circulation in the arteries diabetic leg ulcers \u2013 caused by the high blood sugar associated with diabetes vasculitic leg ulcers \u2013 associated with chronic inflammatory disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus traumatic leg ulcers \u2013 caused by injury to the leg malignant leg ulcers \u2013 caused by a tumour of the skin of the leg Most ulcers caused by artery disease or diabetes occur on the foot rather than the leg. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2016 Next review due: 02\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 346 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Varicose veins Deep vein thrombosis Hypertension Oedema Varicose eczema External links British Association of Dermatologists Circulation Foundation The Lindsay Leg Club Foundation Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leg, broken","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/broken-leg","content":"Broken leg - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Broken leg  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview broken-leg Clinical trials Broken leg Introduction  A broken leg (leg fracture) will be severely painful and may be swollen or bruised. You usually won't be able to walk on it. If it's a severe fracture, the leg may be an odd shape and the bone may even be poking out of the skin. There may have been a \"crack\" sound when the leg was broken and the shock and pain of breaking your leg may cause you to feel faint, dizzy or sick. What to do If you think you or someone else has broken their leg, go immediately to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department. Call 999 for an ambulance if the injury seems severe or you're not able to get to A&E quickly. While you make your way to A&E or wait for an ambulance: avoid moving the injured leg as much as possible \u2013 keep it straight and put a cushion or clothing underneath to support it don't try to realign any bones that are out of place cover any open wounds with a sterile dressing, a clean cloth or a clean item of clothing \u2013 maintain direct pressure on the wound if it keeps bleeding If the person is pale, cold and sweaty (in shock), lie them down and carefully rest their legs above the level of their heart to improve their blood flow. When raising the broken leg, ensure it's kept straight and supported by a cushion. Keep them warm and calm until you can get medical help. How a broken leg is treated Immobilisation First, a doctor will give you painkillers and may fix a splint to your leg to secure it in position and prevent further damage. For severe pain, you may be given painkilling gas through a face mask or medication through a drip into a vein. An X-ray is often necessary to assess the fracture. If the broken bone is still in position, you'll usually just need a plaster cast. This holds the bone in place so it can heal. If there's a lot of swelling, you may just have a splint or cast around the back half of your leg until the swelling goes down. A full cast can be fitted a few days later. You may be provided with painkillers to take home and information on how to look after your cast. Read more about how to look after your plaster cast. Reduction If the bones are misaligned, a doctor or surgeon may need to put them back into place. This is known as \"reduction\". Sedatives are sometimes provided before the procedure and local or regional anaesthetic is used to numb the site of the break. In some cases a general anaesthetic is needed (which means you\u2019ll be asleep during the procedure). Once the bones are in the correct position, a plaster cast can be applied (see above). Surgery Severe fractures are often treated with surgery to realign and fix the broken bones. Surgeons can fix bones with metal wires, plates, screws or rods. Plates, screws and rods will usually be left in place permanently unless they become a problem, whereas wires will be removed 4-6 weeks after the operation. Sometimes an external frame (external fixator) is attached to the broken bones with metal pins to help keep them in place. This is removed once the fracture has healed. After surgery, a plaster cast may be applied to protect the leg (see above). Follow-up appointments An appointment will be made for you to attend a fracture clinic so specialist orthopaedic doctors can monitor your fracture. The first appointment is usually booked for a week or two after you're discharged from hospital. Severe fractures will usually heal within three to six months, but may require follow-up appointments every few months for a year or more afterwards. Further X-rays are often necessary to check how well your leg is healing. Recovering from a broken leg You'll be given advice by your doctor about how much you should move your leg and when you can put weight on it. It takes around six to eight weeks for a minor fracture to heal. You'll probably need to use crutches or a wheelchair during this time, until it's possible to put weight on the leg again. You'll be shown how to safely use any mobility equipment you're provided with. More severe fractures can take between three and six months to fully heal. Some can take even longer. The hospital may recommend regular physiotherapy appointments to help you maintain or regain muscle strength, movement and flexibility. This will include specific exercises to do before and after the cast is removed. Don't try to rush your recovery by returning to your normal activities too quickly, as the broken bone may not be fully healed even when the pain has gone. Follow the advice of your doctor, who'll probably recommend gradually increasing how much you use your leg over time. You shouldn't drive while in a cast. Seek advice from your doctor about when you can drive again. Possible complications For most people, a broken bone will heal within a few months and there won't be any further problems. However, complications can sometimes occur. These include: Damaged muscle, nerves or blood vessels around the fracture \u2013 this can occur during the initial injury or during surgery. It may lead to loss of movement or feeling, or may affect the blood supply to the limb. Bone infection \u2013 this is more likely if surgery is performed or the broken bone stuck out of the skin. It can significantly delay healing and will often require treatment with antibiotics and\/or surgery. Compartment syndrome \u2013 a painful and potentially serious condition caused by bleeding or swelling within a bundle of muscles. This can occur soon after a fracture, after the plaster cast has been applied or after surgery. Emergency surgery will usually be needed to relieve the build-up of pressure in your leg. Occasionally, a further operation may be needed if the bone doesn't heal properly. This can happen if the bone doesn't align properly during surgery, you put too much weight on the bone before it heals, the fracture is severe, if you have diabetes or you smoke during your recovery. Types of fracture Some broken bones are more serious than others \u2013 it depends on the location of the fracture, how the bone has broken and whether there is any damage to the surrounding tissue. The most common types of fracture are: Stress fractures \u2013 tiny cracks in the bone caused by overuse; common in athletes. Undisplaced or hairline fracture \u2013 a fracture through the bone with little damage to the surrounding tissue. Displaced fracture \u2013 the two parts of the broken bone have moved apart (misaligned). Comminuted fracture \u2013 the bone has broken (shattered) into several pieces. Open or compound fracture \u2013 a complicated break where the bone has broken through the skin, or the initial injury has exposed the broken bone. Page last reviewed: 31\/07\/2015 Next review due: 31\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 203 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 107  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Find an A&E department First aid How should I care for my plaster cast? Physiotherapy External links Red Cross: broken bones St John Ambulance: broken bones About A&E departments Find out when it is appropriate to go to A&E and what other services offer urgent care Physiotherapy Find out how physiotherapy can help promote healing and wellbeing NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Legionnaires' disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Legionnaires-disease","content":"Legionnaires' disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Legionnaires' disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Legionnaires-disease Clinical trials Legionnaires-disease Community Legionnaires' disease Introduction  Legionnaires\u2019 disease is a serious lung infection caused by Legionella bacteria. Initial symptoms usually include flu-like symptoms, such as: mild headaches muscle pain high temperature (fever), usually 38C (100.4F) or above  chills tiredness changes to your mental state, such as confusion Once bacteria begin to infect your lungs, you may also experience symptoms of pneumonia, such as: a persistent cough \u2013 which is usually dry at first, but as the infection develops you may start coughing up phlegm or, rarely, blood shortness of breath  chest pains See your GP as soon as possible if you develop the symptoms above. If you have a high temperature, you may have an infection of some kind. Seek urgent medical attention if you have more severe symptoms, such as chest pain and breathing difficulties. It usually takes six to seven days between getting the infection and the start of symptoms (known as the incubation period), although it can be any time from two to 19 days. As Legionnaires' disease has similar symptoms to other illnesses, your recent travel history will be relevant in making a diagnosis. If an infection is suspected, a urine test can be used to check for Legionnaires' disease.  How does Legionnaires\u2019 disease spread? Legionnaires\u2019 disease is caused by Legionella bacteria infecting your lungs. It's usually caught by breathing in small droplets of contaminated water. The infection isn't contagious and can't be spread directly from person to person. Legionella bacteria is usually found (often in harmlessly low numbers) in sources of water, such as ponds, rivers and lakes. However, the bacteria can rapidly multiply if they find their way into artificial water supply systems, such as air conditioning systems. Large buildings, such as hotels, hospitals, museums and office blocks, are more vulnerable to Legionella contamination because they have larger, more complex water supply systems in which the bacteria can quickly spread. The two things that Legionella bacteria need to grow and reproduce are: a water temperature of 20-45C (68-113F) impurities in the water that the bacteria can use for food \u2013 such as rust, algae and limescale Although rare, Legionnaires' disease has also come from contaminated showers, sprinkler systems and spas. Legionnaires' disease is rare in the UK. In 2013, 284 people were reported to have the infection in England and Wales. Of these cases, 88 people (31%) were exposed to the infection while travelling abroad \u2013 mainly to Mediterranean countries, but also tropical countries such as India. However, given the millions of trips made abroad each year, 88 cases is a very small number. Cases of Legionnaires' disease arising in England and Wales usually peak between July and September. Increased risk Everyone is potentially at risk of developing Legionnaires\u2019 disease. However, certain things make it more likely that you will experience a more severe form of the infection. These include: being 50 years of age or over \u2013 235 (83%) of the 284 confirmed cases in 2013 involved people over 50 years of age smoking, or having smoked heavily in the past (a recent study has shown that smoking cannabis may also increase your risk) drinking alcohol heavily  about three-quarters have an underlying medical condition, such as diabetes, kidney disease, or a pre-existing lung condition having a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, people with HIV and AIDS or cancer Treating Legionnaires' disease Legionnaires' disease is treated with a course of antibiotics, such as erythromycin or clarithromycin. Antibiotics will be taken as a tablet or capsule, or through a continuous drip into a vein in your arm. How long you'll need antibiotic treatment for will depend on how severe the condition is. Treatment usually lasts about a week, but may continue for up to three weeks. Around 90% of people with Legionnaires' disease make a full recovery after taking antibiotics. However, while you may start to feel better after a few days, it can take weeks until you're completely back to normal. During this period, it's common to feel tired.  Legionnaires' disease can be particularly serious in people with pre-existing health conditions. In this case, you may be admitted to hospital so your health can be closely monitored. Complications of Legionnaires' disease In some cases, Legionnaires' disease can lead to further, life-threatening problems. Severe infection can cause some organs, such as your lungs or kidneys, to stop working properly. Another complication is septic shock. An estimated 10% of otherwise healthy people who develop Legionnaires' disease die due to problems like these. During 2011 to 2013, there were 84 deaths from Legionnaires\u2019 disease in England and Wales (including overseas travellers). Most deaths occur in people who are 70 years of age or older. Preventing Legionnaires' disease The best way to prevent an outbreak of Legionnaires\u2019 disease is to ensure that any water system under your control is properly maintained and conforms to relevant health and safety regulations. This mainly involves keeping water either cooled below 20C or heated above 60C. The water supply should also be kept free of impurities and moving, so that it doesn't stagnate. The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) is an independent regulator for reducing work-related death and serious injury in Britain. It provides guidance about Legionnaires' disease on its website, including information and advice about managing legionella in hot and cold water systems. If you're travelling abroad, be aware of the risk of Legionnaires\u2019 disease and seek medical advice if you develop any symptoms of the infection. There's currently no vaccine that offers protection against Legionnaires' disease. If you're at increased risk of developing severe Legionnaires\u2019 disease \u2013 for example, because you have a weakened immune system, you may want to consider avoiding water systems that could be contaminated, such as spas. Notifiable disease Legionnaires\u2019 disease is a notifiable disease. This means that if a doctor diagnoses the condition, they must tell the local authority under The Health Protection (Notification) Regulations 2010. The authority will try to identify the source of the outbreak and put in place any necessary precautionary measures. If you're able to provide the name of the hotel you stayed in while abroad, the UK Public Health authorities will contact the Public Health authorities in that country so the hotel can be inspected. Page last reviewed: 14\/02\/2015 Next review due: 14\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 268 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chest infection COPD Paying for treatment abroad Pneumonia Travel health External links British Lung Foundation HSE: Legionnaires' disease GOV.UK: Legionnaires' disease in England and Wales Food and water abroad Find out how to protect yourself against illnesses in contaminated food and water Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Legionnaires' disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"LEMS","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/lambert-eaton-myasthenic-syndrome","content":"Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome Introduction  Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is a rare disorder caused by a problem with the transmission of nerve signals to the muscles. It results in muscle weakness and sometimes dryness of the mouth, constipation and impotence. The immune system mistakenly attacks the nerve endings, which weakens the nerve impulses from the nerves to the muscles and prevents the muscles contracting (tightening) properly. In about 50% of people with LEMS, the disease is triggered by an underlying lung cancer (the type associated with smoking). These people usually develop the disease in middle age or later. There is no obvious trigger in the other 50% of patients with LEMS who don't have cancer. This form of the disease may start at any age. LEMS is estimated to affect between 1 in 250,000 and 1 in 333,000 people worldwide. It is also known as myasthenic syndrome or Eaton-Lambert syndrome. What are the symptoms?  Muscle weakness LEMS causes weakness and sometimes aching in the arm and leg muscles. This can make it difficult to climb stairs, get up from sitting, and lift objects or raise the arms. Very characteristically, people with LEMS have difficulty walking. They may describe this as \"like walking through treacle\". Strength may improve initially when exercising, only to lessen as exercise continues. The neck muscles can also be affected, making swallowing, chewing, speaking and even breathing difficult. Some people may struggle to keep their neck upright. A few people will have weakness of the eye muscles, resulting in drooping eyelids. Problems with the autonomic nervous system The autonomic nervous system is the nervous system in charge of automatic body functions we don't need to think about, such as breathing, sexual arousal and swallowing. When the nerves in the autonomic nervous system are affected, it may cause a wide range of symptoms, including a dry mouth, impotence, blurry vision, constipation and dizziness upon standing. Lung cancer In about 50% of patients, LEMS is associated with small cell lung cancer, an aggressive type of cancer that spreads quickly. Read about the symptoms of lung cancer. Very rarely, it may be associated with other forms of cancer. What is the cause? LEMS is caused by a problem with the immune system. The body releases antibodies to attack the nerve endings as if they were invading germs. Normally, nerve signals travel down the nerves and stimulate the nerve endings to release a chemical called acetylcholine. Acetylcholine comes into contact with the nearby muscle receptors, activating the receptors and causing the muscles to contract. When antibodies attack the nerve endings in LEMS, it decreases the amount of acetylcholine that is released. The nerve impulse from the nerve to the muscle isn't strong enough, so the muscle cannot properly contract and becomes weak. When someone with LEMS also has problems such as a dry mouth and blurred vision, it's because the nerves in the autonomic nervous system have been affected, too. LEMS is not inherited. How is it diagnosed? If you have any of the above symptoms, see your GP. They should look at your medical history and your symptoms, carry out a physical examination, and test your reflexes. The symptoms of LEMS are common in a number of different conditions. For example, it's very similar to another autoimmune condition called myasthenia gravis. This means you'll need to be referred to a neurologist (a specialist in nervous system disorders), who will carry out some tests. Blood test A special type of blood test can be used to detect the antibodies (proteins) that damage the nerve endings. These antibodies are not detectable in people without LEMS. Nerve conduction tests Electromyography is a procedure that can be used to identify communication problems between the nerves and muscles. It involves inserting a needle electrode through the skin into the muscle. This produces an electrical recording of the muscle activity. If you have LEMS, your muscles will not respond very well to the electrical stimulation. A nerve stimulation test is also used, and can show whether the transmission of signals between the nerve and muscle is poor. How is it treated? Anyone who has been diagnosed with LEMS must first be investigated for possible underlying cancer. If cancer is present, this needs to be treated. Removal of the cancer can significantly improve symptoms. LEMS cannot be cured, but the symptoms can be managed through a variety of approaches: by stimulating greater release of acetylcholine \u2013 through the use of 3,4-diaminopyridine by prolonging the activity of the acetylcholine that is released \u2013 with a drug called pyridostigmine by reducing the levels of the antibodies causing the condition \u2013 with steroids or immunosuppressant drugs You can also use intravenous immunoglobulin or plasma exchange to temporarily improve your condition while waiting for immunosuppressant drug therapy to become effective. These treatment options are covered below. Medication 3,4-diaminopyridine (DAP) tablets increase the release of acetylcholine from nerve cells. DAP is usually well tolerated and effective. It may be used in combination with pyridostigmine. Pyridostigmine tablets slow down the breakdown of acetylcholine. They can sometimes cause side effects, such as stomach cramps, muscle twitching, diarrhoea and nausea. Your doctor will be able to prescribe additional medication for you if you experience these. These medicines tend to work best in cases of mild LEMS. They can improve muscle contractions and strength in the affected muscles. They are always used as the first line of treatment. If these simple treatments are not effective in controlling symptoms, you may be tried on steroid tablets (prednisolone). Initially, a high dose is required to bring the condition under control, which may take many months. Such high doses can cause side effects (weight gain, high blood pressure, diabetes, cataracts, and osteoporosis). Learn more about the side effects of steroid medication. Doctors may prescribe an additional medication that suppresses the immune system, such as azathioprine or methotrexate. These are slow to act, but in the long term may allow you to reduce the dose of steroids and therefore reduce the risk of side effects. Regular blood monitoring is required for all people taking these immunosuppressants. All of these medications have associated side effects that your doctors will discuss with you. Plasmapheresis and immunoglobulin therapy Plasmapheresis or intravenous immunoglobulin therapy may be needed in very severe cases of LEMS, where a person has such severe muscle weakness that it is causing life-threatening breathing or swallowing problems. Plasmapheresis involves redirecting your blood through a machine, which removes the plasma that contains the harmful antibodies. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy means you're given an injection of normal antibodies from donated blood. This temporarily changes the way your immune system operates.  Both treatments can produce a rapid improvement in the symptoms of LEMS, but the benefits usually only last a few weeks. They are therefore not suitable as long-term treatments, and are usually only used to treat people who are seriously ill while they are waiting for other treatments to become effective. What's the outlook? Some people respond well to medication and are able to stop using all steroids when their symptoms stop (in remission), while continuing to take secondary immunosuppressant medication. In time \u2013 usually years \u2013 it may be possible for some patients to stop all immunosuppressant medication if they remain well. Others respond less well to medication and find the disease affects their everyday activities and quality of life. If there is no cancer, LEMS does not shorten life. But people with small cell lung cancer will have a shorter life expectancy because of the aggressive nature of the cancer. They can develop complications such as difficulty breathing, difficulty swallowing and pneumonia. Information about you If you have LEMS, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/12\/2014 Next review due: 09\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 19 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with disability Support for carers External links Muscular Dystrophy Association Myaware NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leptospirosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leptospirosis","content":"Leptospirosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Leptospirosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leptospirosis Clinical trials Leptospirosis Leptospirosis Symptoms Leptospirosis Causes Leptospirosis Treatment Leptospirosis Prevention Introduction  Leptospirosis is a type of bacterial infection spread by animals. It's caused by a strain of bacteria called leptospira. In 90% of cases, leptospirosis only causes mild flu-like symptoms, such as a headache, chills and muscle pain. However, in some cases the infection is more severe and can cause life-threatening problems, including organ failure and internal bleeding. In its most severe form, leptospirosis is also known as Weil's disease. The common mild symptoms mean most leptospirosis infections are hard to diagnose. Diagnosis is easier if the infection causes more serious problems. Read more about the symptoms of leptospirosis. Why does leptospirosis happen? Leptospirosis is spread to humans by animals. You can catch it by touching soil or water contaminated with the urine of wild animals infected with the leptospira bacteria. Animals known to be carriers of the leptospira bacteria include cattle, pigs, dogs and rodents, particularly rats. Although the condition is uncommon in the UK, people who regularly deal with animals, such as farmers and vets, have a higher risk of developing leptospirosis. You may also be at a higher risk if you frequently come into contact with rivers and lakes. This might be because of your occupation or through taking part in activities such as water sports and fishing. It's incredibly rare for it to spread between humans. Read more about the causes of leptospirosis. When to see your GP See your GP if you are experiencing symptoms of leptospirosis and you have recently: travelled to parts of the world where leptospirosis is widespread been exposed to a freshwater source, such as a river, lake, drain, canal, pond or flood water been exposed to animal urine or animal blood \u2013 for example, if you work in farming, an abattoir, or care for animals (veterinary care) A diagnosis of leptospirosis can be confirmed by running a series of blood and urine tests to check for specific antibodies. Who is affected? Leptospirosis is rare in the UK, with less than 40 cases reported in England and Wales every year. Many cases originate overseas and the condition is rarely fatal. Most of the people affected either worked with livestock, or contracted the condition from sewage or freshwater sources. Leptospirosis is more common in tropical and subtropical areas of the world. Can leptospirosis be prevented? The risk of contracting leptospirosis in the UK is so low you don't need to take drastic measures to avoid the condition. If you work with animals \u2013 dead or alive \u2013 or are in regular contact with freshwater sources, you can help protect yourself from leptospirosis by wearing appropriate protective clothing and by cleaning and dressing wounds. This advice is particularly useful if you 're travelling to an area where leptospirosis is more common. Read more about preventing leptospirosis. How is leptospirosis treated? Leptospirosis is treated with a course of antibiotics. For mild forms of leptospirosis, antibiotic tablets that can be taken at home are usually used for about a week. Most people with more severe leptospirosis will be admitted to hospital so their body's functions can be supported while the underlying infection is treated with injections of antibiotics. Read more about treating leptospirosis. Reporting leptospirosis If you may have contracted leptospirosis at your place of work, notify your employer so they can report it. If you're self-employed, you should report it yourself. You can read more about Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations on the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) website. Page last reviewed: 12\/11\/2014 Next review due: 12\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 158  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food and water abroad Travel health External links HSE: leptospirosis \u2013 are you at risk? (PDF, 94kb) NaTHNaC: leptospirosis Safe swimming: what's lurking in the water? Make sure you don\u2019t catch anything nasty when taking the plunge in the sea, river, pond or lake Find and choose services for Leptospirosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, acute lymphoblastic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic","content":"Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Real stories Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Community Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Symptoms Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Causes Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Diagnosis Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Treatment Leukaemia-acute-lymphoblastic Complications Introduction  Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. Acute leukaemia means the condition progresses rapidly and aggressively and requires immediate treatment. Acute leukaemia is classified according to the type of white blood cells affected by cancer. There are two main types: lymphocytes, which are mostly used to fight viral infections neutrophils, which perform several functions, such as fighting bacterial infections, defending the body against parasites and preventing the spread of tissue damage  These pages focus on acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, which is cancer of the lymphocytes. The following other types of leukaemia are covered elsewhere: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia chronic myeloid leukaemia acute myeloid leukaemia Warning signs of acute leukaemia Symptoms of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia usually begin slowly before rapidly getting severe as the number of immature white blood cells in your blood increases (see below for an explanation of this). Symptoms include: pale skin tiredness breathlessness having repeated infections over a short space of time unusual and frequent bleeding Read more about the symptoms of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. What happens in acute leukaemia All of the blood cells in the body are produced by bone marrow \u2013 a spongy material found inside bones. Bone marrow produces specialised cells called stem cells which have the ability to develop into three important types of blood cells: red blood cells, which carry oxygen around the body white blood cells, which help fight infection platelets, which help stop bleeding Usually the bone marrow produces stem cells which are allowed to fully develop before being released into the blood. But in acute leukaemia, bone marrow starts releasing large numbers of immature white blood cells known as blast cells. As the number of blast cells increases there is a drop in the number of red blood cells and platelet cells. This drop causes the symptoms of anaemia, such as tiredness, and increases the risk of excessive bleeding. Also, blast cells are less effective than mature white blood cells at fighting bacteria and viruses, making you more vulnerable to infection. How common is acute lymphoblastic leukaemia? Around 8,600 people are diagnosed with leukaemia each year in the UK. In 2011, 654 people were diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Despite being uncommon overall, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia is the most common type of cancer to affect children. Approximately one in every 2,000 children will develop it. About 85% of cases occur in children aged under 15, mostly between the ages of two and five years old. The cause or causes of acute leukaemia are uncertain, but known risk factors include: exposure to high levels of radiation exposure to benzene, a chemical used in manufacturing that is also found in cigarettes Read more information about the causes of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Outlook The outlook for children with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia is usually good. Almost all children will achieve a remission (a period of time where they are free from symptoms) from their symptoms, and 85% will be completely cured. The outlook for adults with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia is less promising as only 40% of people with the condition will be completely cured. Treatments for acute lymphoblastic leukaemia usually involve a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In some cases, a bone marrow transplant may also be needed to achieve a cure. Read more about the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. If a cure is not possible, there is a risk that the lack of healthy blood cells can make the person extremely vulnerable to life-threatening infections (due to the lack of white blood cells) or uncontrolled and serious bleeding (due to the lack of platelets). Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Angela describes how she dealt with her two-year-old son's leukaemia diagnosis, and an expert explains the common symptoms and treatment options. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 18\/08\/2014 Next review due: 18\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 81 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acute myeloid leukaemia Bone marrow donation Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Chronic myeloid leukaemia Find cancer support services Stem cell and bone marrow donation External links Anthony Nolan Trust Bloodwise: blood cancer Cancer Research UK: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia Children with Cancer Leukaemia Care: patient information Macmillan: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find cancer support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=Cancer","content":"Find Cancer information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Cancer information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Living with cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Cancer\/Pages\/Cancerhome.aspx","content":"Living with cancer - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Living with cancer Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Cancer, living with Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus One for the Boys: why do men not talk about cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Early cancer diagnosis is key, but that doesn't mean men always get checked out when they should. In this video, actors and sports personalities try to answer the question: Why are men so dumb when it comes to talking about cancer? All NHS Choices videos Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Preparing for your cancer test results If you're waiting for your cancer test results, here's how you can prepare for your consultation. Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a diagnosis and where to find support. Plus watch a video about one man's experience of cancer. Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your priority is medical care. But you can also get help in other areas of life. Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support. Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment. Living with lung cancer Practical advice for living with lung cancer, covering finances, feelings and controlling symptoms. Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions. 'I had breast cancer and then cervical cancer' Juanita explains the impact of cancer on her life, and how charity work helps others and brings her happiness. 'I beat testicular cancer' Former footballer Neil Harris talks about having testicular cancer, including his treatment and telling his family. Cancer: end of life care Information on coping with a terminal cancer diagnosis, including advice on counselling, practical issues and financial help. Talking to your kids about cancer Talking to children about your cancer may be difficult, but these tips can make it easier for you and them. Lung cancer myths and facts We separate the facts from the fiction about lung cancer and its link with smoking and other risk factors. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler talks about her experience of being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. 'I had prostate cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Philip Kissi didn't notice any symptoms. He talks about his diagnosis and treatment. 'My daughter Caron's breast cancer' TV star Caron Keating died from breast cancer in 2004. Her mother, Gloria Hunniford, explains how she coped. Getting started Why a balanced diet is important Keep skin safe in the sun Get help to stop smoking Cut down on your drinking Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Medical Oncology Information and support for mental health Renal units Alcohol addiction Stroke End of life hospice services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Bowel cancer self-assessment Do you have any symptoms? Mole self-assessment Find out if your moles need to be checked Also on NHS Choices Different types of cancer Breast cancer: female Breast cancer: male Bowel cancer Cervical cancer Lung cancer Skin cancer: malignant melanoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Common questions about cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines Breast cancer Information on breast changes to watch out for, plus breast cancer genes, breast reconstruction and mastectomy Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, acute myeloid","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leukaemia-acute","content":"Acute myeloid leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Acute myeloid leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leukaemia-acute Clinical trials Leukaemia-acute Community Acute myeloid leukaemia Leukaemia-acute Symptoms Leukaemia-acute Causes Leukaemia-acute Diagnosis Leukaemia-acute Treatment Leukaemia-acute Complications Introduction  Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. Acute leukaemia means it progresses rapidly and aggressively, and usually requires immediate treatment. Acute leukaemia is classified according to the type of white blood cells affected. The two main types of white blood cells are: lymphocytes \u2013 mostly used to fight viral infections myeloid cells \u2013 which perform a number of different functions, such as fighting bacterial infections, defending the body against parasites and preventing the spread of tissue damage  This topic focuses on acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), which is an aggressive cancer of the myeloid cells. The following types of leukaemia are covered separately: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia chronic myeloid leukaemia chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Signs and symptoms of AML The symptoms of AML usually develop over a few weeks and become increasingly more severe. Symptoms can include: pale skin tiredness breathlessness frequent infections unusual and frequent bleeding, such as bleeding gums or nosebleeds In more advanced cases, AML can make you extremely vulnerable to life-threatening infections or serious internal bleeding. Read more about the complications of AML. Seeking medical advice You should see your GP if you or your child have possible symptoms of AML. Although it's highly unlikely that leukaemia is the cause, these symptoms should be investigated. If your GP thinks you may have leukaemia, they'll arrange blood tests to check your blood cell production. If the tests suggest there's a problem, you'll be urgently referred to a haematologist (a specialist in treating blood conditions) for further tests and any necessary treatment. Read more about diagnosing AML. What causes AML? AML occurs when specialised cells called stem cells, which are found in the bone marrow (a spongy material inside the bones), produce too many immature white blood cells. These immature cells are known as blast cells. Blast cells don't have the infection-fighting properties of healthy white blood cells, and producing too many can lead to a decrease in the number of red blood cells (which carry oxygen in the blood) and platelets (cells that help the blood to clot). It's not clear exactly why this happens and, in most cases, there's no identifiable cause. However, a number of factors that can increase your risk of developing AML have been identified. These include: previous chemotherapy or radiotherapy exposure to very high levels of radiation (including previous  radiotherapy treatment) exposure to benzene \u2013 a chemical used in manufacturing that's also found in cigarette smoke having an underlying blood disorder or genetic disorder, such as Down's syndrome Read more about the causes of AML. Who's affected AML is a rare type of cancer, with around 2,600 people diagnosed with it each year in the UK. The risk of developing AML increases with age. It's most common in people over 65. How AML is treated AML is an aggressive type of cancer that can develop rapidly, so treatment usually needs to begin soon after a diagnosis is confirmed. Chemotherapy is the main treatment for AML. It's used to kill as many leukaemia cells in your body as possible and reduce the risk of the condition coming back (relapsing). In some cases, intensive chemotherapy and radiotherapy may be needed, in combination with a bone marrow or stem cell transplant, to achieve a cure. Read more about treating AML. Outlook The outlook for AML largely depends on the specific type of AML you have, as well as your age and general health. There are many subtypes of AML, which are classified according to various features \u2013 such as the specific genetic changes in the leukaemia cells. Some types of AML are more challenging to treat than others. Even if treatment is initially successful, there's still a significant risk that the condition will return at some point during the next few years. If this happens, treatment may need to be repeated. A number of medical trials have suggested that almost half of those aged under 60 diagnosed with AML will live for at least five years, and in some types of AML, such as acute promyeloid leukaemia (APML), around 85% will live for at least five years. In general, the outlook for children with AML tends to be better than that of adults diagnosed with the condition. Page last reviewed: 14\/03\/2016 Next review due: 14\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 171 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia Bone marrow donation Chronic myeloid leukaemia Find cancer support services Stem cell and bone marrow transplants External links Anthony Nolan Bloodwise: childhood AML healthtalk.org: leukaemia Leukaemia Care My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions, and where to go for further help and support Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, chronic lymphocytic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic","content":"Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Clinical trials leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Community Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Diagnosis leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Treatment leukaemia-chronic-lymphocytic Complications   Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is a type of cancer that affects the white blood cells and tends to progress slowly over many years. It mostly affects people over the age of 60 and is rare in people under 40. Children are almost never affected. In chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), the spongy material found inside some bones (bone marrow) produces too many white blood cells called lymphocytes that aren't fully developed and don't work properly. Over time this can cause a range of problems, such as an increased risk of picking up infections, persistent tiredness, swollen glands in the neck, armpits or groin, and unusual bleeding or bruising. CLL is different from other types of leukaemia, including chronic myeloid leukaemia, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and acute myeloid leukaemia. This page covers: Symptoms of CLL Treatments for CLL Outlook for CLL Causes of CLL Support groups and charities Symptoms of CLL CLL doesn't usually cause any symptoms early on and may only be picked up during a blood test carried out for another reason. When symptoms develop, they may include: getting infections often anaemia \u2013 persistent tiredness, shortness of breath and pale skin bleeding and bruising more easily than normal a high temperature (fever) night sweats swollen glands in your neck, armpits or groin swelling and discomfort in your tummy unintentional weight loss You should visit your GP if you have any persistent or worrying symptoms. These symptoms can have other causes other than cancer, but it's a good idea to get them checked out. Read more about diagnosing CLL and complications of CLL. Treatments for CLL As CLL progresses slowly and often has no symptoms at first, you may not need to be treated immediately. If it's caught early on, you'll have regular check-ups over the following months or years to see if it's getting any worse. If CLL starts to cause symptoms, or isn't diagnosed until later on, the main treatments are: chemotherapy \u2013 where medication taken as a tablet or given directly into a vein is used to destroy the cancerous cells a stem cell or bone marrow transplant \u2013 where donated cells called stem cells are transplanted into your body so you start to produce healthy white blood cells Treatment can't usually cure CLL completely, but can slow its progression and lead to periods where there are no symptoms. Treatment may be repeated if the condition comes back. Read more about treating CLL. Outlook for CLL The outlook for CLL depends on how advanced it is when it's diagnosed, how old you are when diagnosed, and your general health. Younger, healthier people who are diagnosed when CLL is still in the early stages generally have the best outlook. Although it can't normally be cured, treatment can help control the condition for many years. Overall, around three in every four people with CLL will live at least five years after diagnosis, but this can range from 10 years or more if caught early on, to less than a year if caught at a very advanced stage. Causes of CLL It's not clear what causes CLL. There's no proven link with radiation or chemical exposure, diet or infections. You can't catch it from anyone else or pass it on. However, having certain genes can increase your chances of developing CLL. You may be at a slightly higher risk of it if you have a close family member with it, although this risk is still small. Support groups and charities Living with a serious and long-term condition such as CLL can be very difficult. You may find it useful to find out as much as you can about the condition and speak to others affected by it. The following support groups and charities can offer help and advice for people CLL, their families and their carers: Bloodwise Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia Support Association (CLLSA) Leukaemia CARE Lymphoma Association The Macmillan Cancer Support and Cancer Research UK websites are also good places for CLL information and support. Page last reviewed: 22\/03\/2016 Next review due: 22\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 124 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bone marrow transplant Chemotherapy Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Macmillan: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia Support Association Bloodwise: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Leukaemia CARE: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Lymphoma Association: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, chronic myeloid","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leukaemia-chronic","content":"Chronic myeloid leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic myeloid leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leukaemia-chronic Clinical trials Leukaemia-chronic Community Chronic myeloid leukaemia Leukaemia-chronic Symptoms Leukaemia-chronic Causes Leukaemia-chronic Diagnosis Leukaemia-chronic Treatment Leukaemia-chronic Complications Introduction  Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. Chronic leukaemia means the condition progresses slowly over many years. Chronic leukaemia is classified according to the type of white blood cells that are affected by cancer. There are two main types: lymphocytes \u2013 mostly used to fight viral infections myeloid cells \u2013 which perform a number of different functions, such as fighting bacterial infections, defending the body against parasites and preventing the spread of tissue damage These pages focus on chronic myeloid leukaemia, which is a cancer of the myeloid cells. The following other types of leukaemia are covered elsewhere: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia acute myeloid leukaemia acute lymphoblastic leukaemia What happens in chronic leukaemia Your bone marrow produces stem cells. These are unique cells because they have the ability to develop into three important types of blood cell: red blood cells \u2013 which carry oxygen around the body white blood cells \u2013 which help fight infection platelets \u2013 which help stop bleeding In leukaemia, a genetic mutation in the the stem cells causes a huge over-production of white blood cells and corresponding drop in red blood cells and platelets. It's this lack of red blood cells which causes symptoms of anaemia, such as tiredness, and the lack of platelets that increases the risk of excessive bleeding. Warning signs of chronic myeloid leukaemia In its early stages, chronic myeloid leukaemia usually causes no noticeable symptoms. As the condition develops, symptoms include: tiredness  weight loss  night sweats a feeling of bloating bruising  bone pain  Read more about the symptoms of chronic myeloid leukaemia.  How common is chronic myeloid leukaemia? Chronic myeloid leukaemia is quite a rare type of cancer. Around 8,600 people are diagnosed with leukaemia every year in the UK. In 2011, around 680 people in the UK were diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukaemia. Chronic myeloid leukaemia can affect people of any age, but it is more common in people aged 40-60. There is no evidence that it runs in families. Outlook The outlook for chronic myeloid leukaemia depends to a large extent on how well a person responds to medication. Most patients (60-65%) do well on imatinib tablets, which are taken every day for life. For those who don't do well on imatinib, more than half respond to one of the alternative drugs. Nilotinib is recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for patients with chronic myeloid leukaemia who are not responding to, or can't tolerate imantinib. Those who fail these drugs or cannot tolerate them may be offered a bone marrow transplant, if this is a suitable treatment. Read more about the treatment of chronic myeloid leukaemia. If the condition is diagnosed early (the chronic phase), the outlook is excellent, with almost 90% of people living at least five years after diagnosis. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 18\/08\/2014 Next review due: 18\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 108 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Acute myeloid leukaemia Stem cell transplant Find cancer support services External links Bloodwise: CML Leukaemia CARE: CML CML Support Macmillan: CML Cancer Research UK: CML My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukaemia, hairy cell","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Hairy-cell-leukaemia","content":"Hairy cell leukaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hairy cell leukaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Hairy-cell-leukaemia Clinical trials Hairy cell leukaemia Introduction  Hairy cell leukaemia is a rare type of long-term (chronic) leukaemia. The condition gets its name from the fine, hair-like strands that develop around the outside of the cancerous cells and are visible under a microscope. It's not known what causes hairy cell leukaemia. Leukaemia Leukaemia is cancer of the white blood cells. All the body's blood cells, including red and white blood cells and platelets, are produced by bone marrow. Bone marrow is a spongy tissue found inside the bones. It also produces special cells called stem cells. In leukaemia, the cancer begins in the stem cells and causes them to produce more white blood cells than are needed. Over time, the build-up of cancerous white blood cells disrupts the normal balance of cells in the blood. This means your body doesn't have enough red blood cells, which carry oxygen around the body, or platelets, which help stop bleeding. This can lead to the symptoms of anaemia, such as tiredness, shortness of breath and feeling faint, as well as increasing the risk of excessive bleeding. Also, as the white blood cells aren't properly developed, they're less effective at fighting bacteria and viruses, making you more vulnerable to infection. Hairy cell leukaemia The symptoms of hairy cell leukaemia develop slowly and are similar to those of other types of leukaemia. They include: weight loss  pale skin weakness, tiredness and breathlessness (due a lack of red blood cells) frequent infections (due to a lack of infection-fighting white blood cells) bleeding or bruising easily pain or swelling in your abdomen (tummy) (see below) The abnormal white blood cells can accumulate in your spleen, causing it to increase in size. The spleen is an organ in the upper left side of your abdomen, behind your stomach and ribs. If your spleen is enlarged, it's likely you'll have a painful lump on the left side of your abdomen. If this is the case, you should visit your GP so the lump can be examined. An enlarged spleen may remove normal blood cells from your bloodstream. This can lead to a further reduction in the number of normal red and white blood cells and platelets in your blood. Diagnosis If your GP suspects leukaemia, they may refer you to a haematologist (a specialist in blood disorders). The haematologist will carry out blood tests to determine how many different types of blood cells there are in your blood sample. This is known as a full blood count (FBC) and will indicate the number of abnormal white blood cells you have. If you have hairy cell leukaemia, it's likely your red blood cell and platelet counts will be low. A bone marrow sample may also be taken which will give the haematologist more detailed information about your condition. An ultrasound scan or a computerised tomography (CT) scan may be needed to examine your spleen. Treatment As hairy cell leukaemia develops slowly, immediate treatment may not be needed. You'll have regular blood tests to monitor your condition. Treatment may be recommended if the number of abnormal white blood cells increases or if you develop symptoms. A number of different treatments are available for hairy cell leukaemia. Chemotherapy is the main treatment and it's usually effective at destroying the cancerous cells. Other treatments are sometimes used in combination with chemotherapy. Rituximab is a type of medication known as a monoclonal antibody. It seeks out a protein found on leukaemia cells and attaches itself to it. The immune system then targets and kills the cells. Interferon is another medicine that can be used to treat hairy cell leukaemia. It can strengthen your immune system and help fight cancer. This type of treatment, known as immunotherapy, may be recommended if you can't have chemotherapy or rituximab, or they're no longer working. Surgery to remove the spleen is rarely used as a treatment for hairy cell leukaemia. However, removal of your spleen may be recommended if: it's enlarged and is causing pain or discomfort it's destroying large numbers of red blood cells or platelets it hasn't shrunk after chemotherapy The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the types of treatment for hairy cell leukaemia. Outlook As with most types of cancer, the outlook for hairy cell leukaemia will depend on how far the condition has advanced at the time of diagnosis and how well it responds to treatment. As hairy cell leukaemia is a rare type of cancer, it's difficult to accurately predict how it will affect individuals in the long-term.  However, according to Cancer Research UK, at least 96 out of 100 people diagnosed with hairy cell leukaemia (96%) will live at least 10 years after being diagnosed. In hairy cell leukaemia the affected blood cells develop hair-like strands on their suface   How common is hairy cell leukaemia? Hairy cell leukaemia is one of the rarest types of leukaemia. In the UK, around 200 people are diagnosed with hairy cell leukaemia each year. The condition most commonly affects people who are 40-60 years of age. It affects men more than women and is very rare in children and teenagers. Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 13\/10\/2014 Next review due: 13\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 30 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Chemotherapy Chronic lymphoblastic leukaemia Chronic myeloid leukaemia Find cancer support services Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: hairy cell leukaemia Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research: hairy cell leukaemia Leukaemia Care Macmillan: hairy cell leukaemia Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia Find out about CLL, a type of cancer affecting the white blood cells that develops slowly over time NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukonychia (white spots on nails)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nail-abnormalities","content":"Nail abnormalities - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nail abnormalities  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Fingernail or toenail abnormalities can tell you a lot about your health. They're often a sign of a fungal nail infection or injury, but can sometimes indicate a more serious underlying disease. Visit your GP if your nails have changed in colour, texture, shape or thickness and you don't know why (you haven't injured your nails or been biting them). This guide gives the most likely reasons for the following nail problems: brittle or crumbly nails  discoloured nails  white nails  thickened, overgrown nails  loose nails  indented spoon-shaped nails  pitting or dents on the nails  grooves going across the width of the nails  unusually curved fingertips and nails  white lines running across the nails  dark stripes running down the nail  red or brown little streaks under the nails  a destroyed nail  infected nail fold (painful, red and swollen skin next to the nail) Brittle or crumbly nails Brittle nails are often just a sign of ageing or long-term exposure to water or chemicals such as detergents and nail polish. Nails can be strengthened by taking biotin (vitamin B7) supplements, by wearing gloves for all wet work and by frequently applying moisturising cream to the nails. Sometimes, brittle or crumbly nails can be caused by: a fungal nail infection, which can be cleared by taking a course of antifungal tablets (this especially tends to be the cause for crumbly toenails) a skin condition called lichen planus, which can just affect the nails an underactive thyroid or overactive thyroid, where the thyroid gland either doesn't produce enough hormones or produces too many nail psoriasis, a long-term skin condition that can cause the nails to become crumbly A less common cause of crumbly nails is reactive arthritis, an unusual reaction of the immune system affecting the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection. If you have a combination of symptoms affecting different parts of your body, your GP might consider this condition. Discoloured nails The most common causes of a yellow nail are fungal nail infections or nail psoriasis. Yellow nails can also result from any of the following: frequent application of nail varnish lymphoedema, a long-term condition that causes swelling of the skin permanent damage to your airways caused by bronchiectasis (a long-term lung condition) sinusitis (inflammation of the lining of the sinuses) inflammation of the thyroid gland, found in the neck tuberculosis (TB), a bacterial infection affecting the lungs jaundice (yellowing of the skin) due to liver disease some drugs, such as mepacrine or carotene   chronic paronychia (infection of the nail fold) Green-black nails can be caused by overgrowth of bacteria called pseudomonas, especially under loose nails. This can be treated by applying antibiotic eye drops underneath the nails or soaking the affected nails in an antiseptic solution or vinegar. Grey nails can be caused by medication such as antimalarials or minocycline. Brown nails can sometimes be caused by thyroid disease, pregnancy, malnutrition and frequent use of nail varnish. Red or yellow drop under the nail If the discolouration looks like a drop of oil under the nail plate or is the colour of salmon, you may have psoriasis of the nails. Half white, half brown nails Fingernails that are half white and half brown (brown near the tips) can be a sign of kidney failure, where the kidneys stop working properly. The link is not fully understood, but one theory is that kidney failure causes chemical changes in the blood that encourage melanin (a skin pigment) to be released into the nail bed. It's also possible that kidney failure causes an increase in the number of tiny blood vessels in the nail bed. It's estimated up to 40% of people with kidney failure have \"half-and-half\" fingernails. Half-and-half nails have also been seen in some people with AIDS and can be seen following chemotherapy. White nails If most of the nail plate has turned white and it's not because the nail has become detached from the nail bed, it's likely to be either a fungal nail infection or a sign of decreased blood supply to the nail bed, known as \"Terry's nails\". Terry's nails are typically white with reddened or dark tips and can be a sign of a wide range of medical conditions, including the following: liver cirrhosis (scarring and damage to the liver) \u2013 about 80% of people with cirrhosis have Terry's nails liver, kidney or heart failure diabetes iron-deficiency anaemia \u2013 a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body chemotherapy an overactive thyroid (where the thyroid gland in your neck produces too many hormones) malnutrition  Thickened, overgrown nails A common cause of thickened nails is a fungal nail infection. This can also cause them to discolour and become crumbly (see above). Other possible causes of thickened or overgrown nails are: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin long-term pressure from shoes that are either too small or too narrow over the toes reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection Severely overgrown horn-like nails Sometimes, the big toenails become so overgrown and thickened that they resemble claws and are almost impossible to cut with conventional nail clippers. This nail disorder is known as onychogryphosis (\"ram's horn nails\"), and is seen in older people or as a response to long-term pressure on the nails. Regular chiropody can help, but sometimes the nails need to be removed by a podiatrist or doctor. Loose nails It's normal for a toenail to come loose and fall off after an injury to the toe. However, if you haven't injured your nail, a loose nail is often caused by over-manicuring the nails and cleaning under the nails with a sharp object. Less commonly, it may be a sign of one of the following health conditions: a fungal nail infection psoriasis of the nail \u2013 psoriasis is a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin warts that cluster around the fingernail an overactive thyroid, which means the thyroid gland in the neck is producing too many hormones  sarcoidosis, a condition where small clumps of cells form in the organs and tissues of the body amyloidosis, where protein builds up in the organs a problem with the connective tissue fibres in the body that support the organs and body tissues poor circulation, for example caused by smoking or Raynaud's disease  an allergic reaction to medicine (usually to a type of antibiotic) or nail cosmetics A loose nail should be cut back to where it's detached to allow the nail to become reattached as it grows. You shouldn't clean your nails with anything other than a soft nailbrush. Indented spoon-shaped nails (koilonychia) If your fingernails curve inwards like spoons (known medically as koilonychia), you may have one of the following disorders: iron-deficiency anaemia, which is a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body haemochromatosis, where the body contains too much iron Raynaud\u2019s disease, a common condition affecting the blood supply to the fingers and toes, causing them to turn white  lupus erythematosus, an uncommon condition where the immune system attacks the body's cells, tissues and organs Pitting or dents on the nails Pitting or small dents on the surface of your nails can be a sign of any of the following diseases: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin (10%-50% of patients with psoriasis have pitted nails) eczema, a long-term skin condition reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection alopecia areata, patches of hair loss that tend to come and go Grooves across the fingernails (Beau's lines) Deep lines or grooves that go from left to right across the nail are known as Beau's lines. They may be a sign of: a previous illness \u2013 the line forms at the time of the illness  chemotherapy a previous injury previous exposure to extremely cold temperatures, if you have Raynaud's disease Illness, injury or cold temperatures can interrupt nail growth and cause nail grooves to form at the base of the nails. These grooves tend to only be noticed a few months later, when the nails have grown and the grooves have moved up the nails to become visible. It takes about four to six months for a fingernail to fully grow out, and 6-12 months for a toenail. Unusually curved fingertips and nails Clubbing of the fingertips means the tissue beneath the nails thickens and the fingertips become rounded and bulbous. The fingernails curve over the rounded fingertips. Clubbing is thought to result from increased blood flow to the fingertips. It can run in families and be entirely harmless. However, if it suddenly develops, it may be a sign of one of many possible medical conditions, including: long-term lung disease or heart disease, such as lung cancer, bronchiectasis, or endocarditis inflammatory bowel disease, a long-term disease that causes inflammation of the lining of the gut stomach cancer or bowel cancer cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) polycythaemia, a condition where the blood is too thick  White lines running across nails White spots or streaks are normal and nothing to worry about, but parallel white lines that extend all the way across the nails, known as Muehrcke's lines, are a sign of low levels of protein in the blood. In contrast to Beau's lines (see above), they're not grooved. They can be due to liver disease or malnutrition. Dark stripes running down the nail If you have dark skin, it's fairly common to find dark stripes running down your nails (linear melanonychia). This occurs in more than 77% of black people over the age of 20, and in most cases is perfectly normal. However, it's not something to ignore: dark stripes may sometimes be a form of skin cancer that affects the nail bed, called subungual melanoma. It's important that your doctor checks it to rule out melanoma. Generally, subungual melanoma only affects one nail. Also, it will cause the stripe to change in appearance (for example, it may become wider or darker over time) and the pigmentation may also affect the surrounding skin (the nail fold). Red or brown little streaks under the nails If you have what look like red or brown little streaks underneath the nails, it's likely these are splinter haemorrhages \u2013 lines of blood caused by tiny damaged blood vessels. Just a few splinters under one nail are nothing to worry about and most likely due to injury of the nail. However, if many nails are affected, these splinters may be a sign of lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, an infection of the heart valves (endocarditis) or another underlying disease. A destroyed nail Nails can be destroyed by: injury, including nail biting skin diseases such as psoriasis or lichen planus overgrowth of the surrounding tissues, which is usually harmless (for example, due to a wart or verruca) but can sometimes be cancerous nail patella syndrome \u2013 an uncommon genetic condition which may cause missing nails, usually at birth  If one of your nails becomes destroyed and you don't remember injuring it, it's important to see your GP. Painful, red and swollen nail fold (paronychia) Paronychia is the name for inflammation of the nail fold, which is the skin and soft tissue that frames and supports the nail. This is most often caused by infection, injury or irritation. It's about three times more common in women than in men. Sometimes, there's an underlying skin condition such as eczema or psoriasis or another medical condition such as diabetes or HIV. Paronychia can be acute, where it develops over a few hours, or chronic, where it lasts more than six weeks. Acute paronychia Acute infective paronychia usually starts after a minor injury to the nail fold, such as from nail biting, picking or manicures. The affected area is red, warm, tender and swollen. After a while pus may be seen, which can form around the nail and may lift the nail. Acute paronychia is often caused by Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, although any number of germs can be involved. Treatment is with antibiotic creams or tablets. If there's a large amount of pus, it can help to have this surgically drained. Sometimes, acute paronychia is caused by the cold sore virus, in which case it's known as herpetic whitlow. Acute paronychia can completely clear in a few days with treatment, but if it's not treated or doesn't respond to treatment, it can become long-term (chronic). Chronic paronychia Chronic paronychia may start more gradually and be more difficult to get rid of. It's most common in people who often have their hands in water or chemicals, such as cleaners, bartenders, canteen staff or fishmongers. It may start in one nail fold but can affect several fingers. The affected nail folds are swollen and may be red and sore from time to time, often after exposure to water. The nail plate gradually becomes thickened and ridged as it grows, and may become yellow or green and brittle. The skin in chronic paronychia is often colonised by a mixture of yeasts and bacteria. These germs thrive on previously damaged skin, without necessarily starting the skin damage in the first place. To settle chronic paronychia, both the skin damage and the colonisation with germs needs to be addressed. It can take months for chronic paronychia to clear, and after that up to a year for nails to grow back to normal. You may find that doing things such as keeping your hands dry and warm, frequently using emollient hand cream and avoiding biting and picking your nails can help.  See your GP if the condition is severe. Depending on the type of paronychia, creams and\/or tablets may be prescribed. Use these as directed. You may be referred to a dermatologist for further investigation of the underlying skin disease or for contact allergy testing, and for treatment advice. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1191 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 663  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 277  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 143  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the nail abnormalities information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/nail_abnormalities_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Foot health Nail patella syndrome Fungal nail infection Ingrown toenail External links DermNet NZ: pictures of nail disease Getting help from the podiatrist Taking care of your feet is essential. Here's how podiatrists and chiropodists can help Footcare services for older people If you're having trouble with tasks such as cutting your toenails, local footcare services can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Leukoplakia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leukoplakia","content":"Leukoplakia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Leukoplakia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leukoplakia Clinical trials Leukoplakia Leukoplakia Causes Leukoplakia Treatment Introduction  Leukoplakia is a white patch that develops in the mouth. The condition is usually painless, but is closely linked to an increased risk of mouth cancer. What are the symptoms? The main feature of leukoplakia is a white patch in the mouth that can't be removed by rubbing. A white patch most commonly occurs on the tongue but can also develop on the: floor of the mouth soft palate (back of the roof of the mouth) inside of the cheek lower lip gums There's usually only one clearly defined patch, but there can sometimes be more than one spread over a larger area. The patch is almost always painless and may be slightly raised, with a thickened or irregular feel to it. The patch is often persistent and can't be removed by brushing or scraping. Sometimes, there's also redness around the affected area. When should I seek medical advice? Visit your dentist if you notice a white patch in your mouth that doesn't heal within 14 days. Leukoplakia doesn't usually cause pain or discomfort, but your dentist will be able to rule out other causes of the white patch, such as a fungal infection. Your dentist may also be able to assess your risk of developing oral cancer in later life. As part of this risk assessment, you may have to attend regular follow-up appointments or see a specialist so that your leukoplakia can be carefully monitored. You may be referred to a specialist for a biopsy, which involves removing a small piece of tissue from the patch. The tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory so it can be examined to see if it's potentially cancerous. What causes leukoplakia? In a few cases, the cause of leukoplakia is unknown (idiopathic) and certain factors are thought to increase your chances of developing it. Tobacco (smoking and chewing it) and heavy alcohol consumption are the two main risk factors for leukoplakia. This is because these substances irritate the mucous membranes (soft tissues) in your mouth. Persistent infections caused by candida (thrush) can also lead to leukoplakia. This is known as candidal leukoplakia. Other causes of white patches include: frictional keratoses \u2013 this can be caused by misaligned teeth, ill-fitting dentures or long-term cheek biting oral lichen planus \u2013 a non-infectious rash that can sometimes occur in the mouth oral thrush (candidiasis) \u2013 a short-term fungal infection of the mouth a vitamin A or B deficiency Read more about the causes of leukoplakia. Treating leukoplakia Leukoplakia doesn't usually cause symptoms and it shouldn't affect your quality of life. However, it should be investigated. Stopping smoking or chewing tobacco and reducing your alcohol consumption may help clear up the white patches in your mouth, as well as reducing your chances of developing mouth cancer. If you're thought to have an increased risk of developing mouth cancer, leukoplakia can be surgically removed to ensure any abnormal cells don't later become cancerous. Regardless of the treatment you receive, it's important to have your mouth regularly examined by a dentist or suitable specialist to ensure the condition isn't progressing. Read more about treating leukoplakia. Preventing leukoplakia It's not always possible to prevent leukoplakia developing because it sometimes has no identifiable cause. This is known as idiopathic leukoplakia. The best thing you can do is to avoid using any form of tobacco and to reduce your alcohol consumption. A diet containing plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables may also help prevent leukoplakia and mouth cancer. Read more about food and diet and healthy eating. Who's affected by leukoplakia? Leukoplakia is a common condition. It's estimated that about one in 100 people will develop leukoplakia at some point in their life. However, leukoplakia rates are higher in parts of the world such as India and Taiwan, where the use of chewing tobacco and related products, such as the areca nut (also known as the betel nut), is widespread. Men are twice as likely as women to develop leukoplakia, and most cases affect older adults who are 50-70 years of age. Hairy leukoplakia Hairy leukoplakia is a type of leukoplakia that affects people with a weakened immune system (the body\u2019s natural defence against infection and illness), particularly those who have HIV. It almost always occurs on the side (or both sides) of the tongue and doesn't cause pain or any change in your sensation of taste. It usually resolves when the immune system improves. Hairy leukoplakia is usually caused by the Epstein-Barr virus, although antiviral medicines rarely help. Unlike other types of leukoplakia, hairy leukoplakia doesn't carry a risk of mouth cancer. However, it should be taken as an important warning sign that your immune system may be weakened. Visit your GP or specialist as soon as possible if you develop hairy leukoplakia. NAM aidsmap is a charity that provides information about HIV and AIDS. You can read more about hairy leukoplakia on its website. Please note that hairy leukoplakia doesn't always mean you have HIV\/AIDS. Video: quitting smoking Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Qutting smoking is the best way to prevent leukoplakia. See how some ex-smokers kicked the habit and their reasons for wanting to quit Media last reviewed: Next review due: Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/01\/2015 Next review due: 15\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 59 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coated or white tongue Drinking and alcohol Mouth cancer Oral thrush in adults Stop smoking External links Cancer Research UK: mouth and oropharyngeal cancer aidsmap: hairy leukoplakia Get help now to stop smoking Six practical, quick and simple steps you can take NOW to quit smoking Tips on cutting down on alcohol Practical tips on how you can reduce your alcohol intake and the associated health benefits Paan, bidi and shisha Chewing tobacco, like smoking, has serious health risks, including mouth cancer. Get help quitting NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lewy body dementia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/dementia-with-lewy-bodies","content":"Dementia with Lewy bodies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Dementia with Lewy bodies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview dementia-with-lewy-bodies Clinical trials Dementia with Lewy bodies dementia-with-lewy-bodies Symptoms dementia-with-lewy-bodies Diagnosis dementia-with-lewy-bodies Treatment Introduction  Dementia with Lewy bodies is a common form of dementia estimated to affect more than 100,000 people in the UK. The term \"dementia\" describes a loss of mental ability (cognitive impairment) associated with gradual death of brain cells. It's rare in anyone younger than 65. Symptoms usually develop gradually and become more severe over the course of several years. Signs and symptoms People with dementia with Lewy bodies not only experience problems with memory and judgement, like those with Alzheimer's disease, but are also likely to have difficulties with concentration and visual perception (recognising objects and making judgements about where they are in space). They may experience: slowed movement, stiff limbs, and tremors recurrent visual hallucinations (seeing things that aren't there) sleep disturbances, including sleepiness during the day fainting, unsteadiness, and falls People with the condition tend to swing from a state of alertness to drowsiness or staring into space. These extreme changes may be unpredictable and happen from hour to hour or day to day. Read more about the symptoms of dementia with Lewy bodies. What causes dementia with Lewy bodies? Dementia with Lewy bodies is caused by deposits of an abnormal protein called Lewy bodies inside brain cells. These deposits, which are also found in people with Parkinson\u2019s disease, build up in areas of the brain responsible for things such as memory and muscle movement. It's not clear why the deposits develop and how exactly they damage the brain, but it's thought they disrupt the brain's normal functions by interfering with chemical signals transmitted from one brain cell to another. Dementia with Lewy bodies usually occurs in people with no family history of the condition, although there have been reports of rare cases that seem to run in families. Diagnosing dementia with Lewy bodies If you think you may have early symptoms of dementia, it's a good idea to see your GP. If you're worried about someone else, encourage them to make an appointment, and perhaps suggest that you go along with them. Your GP can do some simple checks to see if there is chance you could have dementia, and they can refer you to a memory clinic or another specialist clinic if necessary. At one of these clinics, you will be asked about your symptoms and have a physical check-up and memory test. You may also have blood tests and brain scans. The results of these checks and tests will give your doctor a good idea as to whether your symptoms are caused by dementia with Lewy bodies, another type of dementia, or something else entirely. Read more about how dementia with Lewy bodies is diagnosed. How dementia with Lewy bodies is managed There is no cure for dementia with Lewy bodies or any medication that will slow it down. However, a few different medicines can be effective in controlling some of the symptoms. In particular, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (used to treat Alzheimer's disease) have been shown to improve symptoms such as hallucinations and confusion in some people. Supportive treatments \u2013 such as physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech and language therapy \u2013 can help improve any problems with movement, everyday tasks, and communication. Psychological therapies and specific dementia activities, such as memory cafés, can also help with memory loss, confusion, and feelings of disorientation. Read more about treating dementia with Lewy bodies.  Outlook How quick dementia with Lewy bodies progresses varies from person to person. Home-based help will be needed, and some people will eventually need residential care in a nursing home. The average survival after the time of diagnosis is similar to that of Alzheimer's disease \u2013 around five to eight years. However, as with Alzheimer's disease, this can be highly variable. If you or a loved one has been diagnosed with dementia, remember that you are not alone. The NHS, social services, and voluntary organisations will be able to provide advice and support to help you and your family. More information Living with dementia Find dementia activities near you Living well with dementia  Staying independent with dementia  Dementia activities  Looking after someone with dementia  Dementia and your relationships  Communicating with people with dementia  Coping with dementia behaviour changes  Care and support Sources of help and support  Organising care at home  Dementia and care homes  Dementia, social services, and the NHS  Dementia and your money  Managing legal affairs for someone with dementia  End of life planning  How you can help Share your dementia experiences Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 22\/01\/2015 Next review due: 22\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 58 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links About dementia Alzheimer's disease Caring for someone with dementia Find dementia support services Health Today Radio: what is a memory café? External links Alzheimer's Society: dementia with Lewy bodies Dementia UK Lewy Body Society National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): supporting people with dementia Which? Elderly Care: what is dementia? Your guide to dementia Do you think you, or someone you know, might have dementia? Read about the signs to look for and how to get help and support Sign up for dementia information emails Have you been diagnosed with dementia or know someone who has? Sign up to receive six weekly emails full of information and advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lice (head)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Head-lice","content":"Head lice and nits - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Head lice and nits  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Head-lice Clinical trials Head-lice Head lice and nits Head-lice Detection Head-lice Treatment   Head lice are tiny insects that live in hair. Nits are the empty egg cases attached to hair that head lice hatch from. Head lice are a common problem, particularly in school children aged 4-11. They're largely harmless, but can live in the hair for a long time if not treated and can be irritating and frustrating to deal with. This page covers: Spotting head lice Getting rid of head lice and nits How you get head lice Prevention How to spot head lice Head lice can be difficult to spot, even when the head is closely inspected. They're very small whitish or grey-brown insects that range from the size of a pinhead to the size of a sesame seed. The only way to be sure someone has head lice is to find a live louse by combing their hair with a special fine-toothed comb. This is called detection combing. Less reliable signs of head lice include: small white eggs or nits (egg cases) in the hair behind the ears or at back of the neck \u2013 see image above an itchy scalp a rash on the back of the neck feeling as though something is moving in the hair How to get rid of head lice and nits Treatments to get rid of head lice are available to buy from pharmacies, supermarkets and online. You don't usually need to see your GP. The main treatments are: lotions or sprays that kill head lice \u2013 these can be very effective, but some aren't suitable for pregnant or breastfeeding women, or for children under two removing head lice with a specially designed comb \u2013 this is suitable for everyone and relatively inexpensive, but needs to be repeated several times and can take a long time to do thoroughly A pharmacist can advise you about the treatments available if you're not sure which is best for you or your child. Make sure you carefully follow the instructions that come with the treatment you choose. Read more about the treatments for head lice. How you get head lice Head lice are spread by direct head to head contact. They climb from one person's hair to another's. Head lice: can't fly, jump or swim are very unlikely to be spread by objects such as hats, combs and pillows don't have a preference for dirty, clean, short or long hair only affect people and can't be caught from animals Once detached from the hair, head lice will usually die within 12-24 hours. Preventing head lice It's very difficult to prevent head lice. You may want to consider regular detection combing \u2013 for example, on a weekly basis \u2013 if you're concerned about your children or yourself. Lotions and sprays don't prevent head lice and should only be used if a live louse has been found in your or your child's hair. Staying off work or school and washing clothing and bedding on a hot wash is unnecessary, as it's unlikely to help prevent the spread of head lice. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/05\/2016 Next review due: 17\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 620 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 343  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 143  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful How do I check for and treat headlice? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Paediatrician Chloe Macaulay describes how to check for and treat headlice. Media last reviewed: 10\/02\/2015 Next review due: 10\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Insect bites Child health 6-15 Your child at school External links British Association of Dermatologists: head lice (PDF, 242kb) Community Hygiene Concern: bug busting KidsHealth: head lice Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"How to treat nits","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/childhealth6-15\/pages\/nits.aspx","content":"Head lice and nits - Treatment - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories How to get rid of head lice and nits  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Head-lice Clinical trials Head lice and nits Head-lice Detection Head-lice Treatment   Treatments to get rid of head lice are available to buy from pharmacies, supermarkets and online.  The main treatments are: Lotions and sprays Wet combing Everyone with head lice in your household should be treated on the same day. If a treatment doesn't work the first time, you can try it again, try a different treatment, or get advice from your school nurse, health visitor, pharmacist or GP. Lotions and sprays There are several different products that can be applied to the scalp and hair to kill head lice, including: dimeticone 4% lotion or lotion spray \u2013 applied and left for 8 hours (usually overnight) dimeticone 4% spray gel \u2013 applied and left for 15 minutes mineral oil and dimeticone spray \u2013 applied and left for 15 minutes isopropyl myristate and cyclomethicone solution \u2013 applied and left for 5-10 minutes Some treatments need be done twice \u2013 seven days apart \u2013 to make sure any newly-hatched lice are killed. Detection combing should usually be done two or three days after finishing treatment, and again another seven days after that, to check for any live head lice. Always check the pack or leaflet to see if a product is suitable for you, particularly if you're pregnant or breastfeeding, or your child has head lice and is less than two years of age. Your pharmacist can recommend a suitable treatment and advise you how to use it correctly if necessary. Wet combing Wet combing involves removing head lice with a special fine-toothed comb. It's suitable for everyone and is relatively inexpensive. A number of lice removal combs are available to buy. Combs with flat-faced teeth spaced 0.2-0.3mm apart are best for removing head lice, although combs with smaller gaps can be used to remove eggs and nits (egg cases) after treatment. The comb may come with instructions outlining how to use it. A commonly used method is described below. Wash the hair with ordinary shampoo and apply plenty of conditioner. Use an ordinary, wide-toothed comb to straighten and untangle the hair. Once the comb moves freely through the hair without dragging, switch to the louse detection comb. Make sure the teeth of the comb slot into the hair at the roots, with the edge of the teeth lightly touching the scalp. Draw the comb down from the roots to the ends of the hair with every stroke, and check the comb for lice each time \u2013 remove lice by wiping the comb with tissue paper or rinsing it. Work through the hair, section by section, so that the whole head of hair is combed through. Do this at least twice to help ensure you haven't missed any areas, until no more lice are found. Repeat this procedure on days five, nine and 13. Detection combing  should be done on day 17, to check for any live head lice. Treatments not recommended The following treatments aren't recommended because they're unlikely to be effective: products containing permethrin head lice \"repellents\" electric head lice combs tree and plant oil treatments, such as tea tree oil, eucalyptus oil, and lavender oil herbal remedies There's also no need to stay off work or school or wash clothing and laundry on a hot wash, as this is unlikely to be useful. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/05\/2016 Next review due: 17\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 625 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 337  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 147  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Insect bites Child health 6-15 Your child at school External links British Association of Dermatologists: head lice (PDF, 242kb) Community Hygiene Concern: bug busting KidsHealth: head lice Your child at school Find out how you can work with your child's school to help keep them healthy and happy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lice (pubic)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pubic-lice","content":"Pubic lice - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pubic lice  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pubic lice Introduction  Pubic lice (Phthirus pubis) are tiny parasitic insects that live on coarse human body hair, such as pubic hair. As well as being found in pubic hair, the lice are also sometimes found in: underarm and leg hair hair on the chest, abdomen and back facial hair, such as beards and moustaches eyelashes and eyebrows (very occasionally) Unlike head lice, pubic lice don't live in scalp hair. Pubic lice are spread through close bodily contact, most commonly sexual contact. Symptoms of pubic lice After getting pubic lice, it can take several weeks before any symptoms appear. Symptoms are the same for men and women and include: itching in the affected areas inflammation and irritation caused by scratching black powder in your underwear blue spots or small spots of blood on your skin, such as on your thighs or lower abdomen (caused by lice bites) Itching is the most common symptom of pubic lice and is an allergic reaction to their saliva. The itching is usually worse at night, when the lice are most active. What do pubic lice look like? Adult pubic lice are very small (2mm long) and aren't easy to see. They're a yellow-grey or dusky red colour and have six legs. Pubic lice are sometimes known as crabs because they have two large front legs that look like the claws of a crab. These are used to hold onto the base of hairs. The lice lay their eggs (nits) in sacs that are stuck firmly to hairs and are a pale brownish colour. When the eggs hatch, the empty egg sacs are white. Although pubic lice and lice eggs are small and difficult to see, they may be visible in coarse hair anywhere on your body (apart from hair on your head). When to seek medical advice See your GP or practice nurse if you think you have pubic lice. Alternatively, you could go to a sexual health clinic, also known as a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic. These are often located in hospitals or health centres. Search for sexual health services in your area. Pubic lice are usually easy to diagnose by examining the affected area. The doctor or nurse may use a magnifying glass to look for signs of the lice, such as pale-coloured eggs or the lice themselves. Getting tested for STIs You should be tested for other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) if you have pubic lice through sexual contact. The lice don't transmit HIV or other STIs, but a check-up is usually recommended as a precaution.  Any sexual partners you've had over the last three months will also need to be seen and treated. If you prefer, staff at the clinic can contact a person on your behalf without releasing your details. How do you get pubic lice? Pubic lice aren't related to poor personal hygiene. They're usually spread through close bodily contact with an infected person. The lice crawl from hair to hair, but can't fly or jump. They need human blood to survive, so will only leave the body to move from one person to another. The most common way pubic lice are spread is through sexual contact, including vaginal, anal and oral sex. Using condoms and other methods of barrier contraception doesn't protect you against pubic lice. Other types of close bodily contact, such as hugging and kissing, can also spread the lice. It's also possible \u2013 though much rarer \u2013 for pubic lice to be spread through sharing clothes, towels and bedding.  Treating pubic lice Pubic lice can be treated at home with insecticide cream, lotion or shampoo. Your GP or pharmacist can advise you about which treatment to use and how to use it. It's important to follow this advice. Some treatments only need to be applied to the affected area, but sometimes the whole body must be treated, taking care to avoid the eyes. The treatment usually needs to be repeated after three to seven days. If the treatment doesn't work, you may need to use another type. This is because pubic lice can develop resistance to some treatments. Your GP or pharmacist will be able to advise you about suitable alternatives. To prevent re-infestation, anyone you've had close bodily contact with, including any sexual partners you've had in the past three months, should also be treated, even if they don't have symptoms. Certain groups, such as young people under 18 years of age and pregnant or breastfeeding women, may require a specific type of treatment. Ask your GP or pharmacist for further advice about this. Applying a lotion, cream or shampoo In most cases the instructions for using a lotion, cream or shampoo will be as follows: apply the product to the affected area, particularly any hairy areas, such as your eyebrows, beard or moustache \u2013 depending on the product, you might need to apply it to your whole body, including the scalp, neck, ears and face be careful not to get the product in your eyes \u2013 if you do, rinse your eyes thoroughly with water reapply the treatment if you wash any part of your body during the treatment time after the treatment time (stated on the packet) has passed, wash the lotion or cream off repeat the treatment after three to seven days as instructed Don't use the medication more than twice. If you think it hasn't worked go to see your GP or pharmacist for advice. Side effects Insecticides used to treat pubic lice may cause skin irritation, such as itchiness, redness, stinging or burning. If you have skin irritation, wash the insecticide off the affected area. Some aqueous and alcohol-based medications may discolour permed, coloured or bleached hair. Check the patient information leaflet. Follow-up treatment The first treatment application will probably kill the lice, but the eggs may not have been destroyed. This means more lice could hatch and the cycle will start again. Reapplying the treatment after three or seven days will ensure that any lice are killed before they're old enough to lay more eggs. Check for lice a week after your second treatment, or return to your GP, practice nurse, or sexual health clinic so they can check for you. Finding empty eggshells (dead nits) doesn't necessarily mean you're still infested as they can remain stuck to the hairs even after treatment. Treating an eyelash infestation Eyelash infestations are rare. If your eyelashes are infested, seek specialist advice from your doctor. They'll be able to recommend the correct treatment for you.  You can't use the same insecticide lotion or cream that's used on your body because it will irritate your eyes. Make sure you follow the treatment instructions carefully. Washing clothing, towels and bedding Wash clothing, towels and bedding in a washing machine. This should be on a hot cycle (50C or higher) to ensure the lice are killed and to prevent reinfection. Complications of pubic lice Sometimes, a pubic lice infestation can lead to minor complications, such as skin or eye problems. Scratching can irritate your skin, or it could lead to an infection such as impetigo (a bacterial skin infection) or furunculosis (boils on the skin). Eye infections, such as conjunctivitis, and eye inflammation, such as blepharitis, can sometimes develop if your eyelashes have been infested with pubic lice. Seek medical advice if you have severe skin irritation or sore eyes. Sexual health advice You can call the Department of Health's sexual health helpline on 0300 123 7123 for confidential advice and support 24 hours a day, seven days a week. If you're under 25, you can also contact an advisor at Brook using their text and webchat service. They provide free and confidential information and advice about STIs, contraception, pregnancy, plus other sexual health matters. Page last reviewed: 15\/01\/2016 Next review due: 15\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 171 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Head lice Sexual health self-assessment STIs External links BASHH: public and patient information Brook: our services FPA: help and advice Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens What happens at an STI clinic What to expect at an STI clinic, including tests, treatment, and the questions you may be asked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find sexual health services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=SexualHealthService","content":"Find Sexual health information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Sexual health information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Sexual health","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Sexualhealthtopics\/Pages\/Sexual-health-hub.aspx","content":"Sexual health - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sexual health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Contraception guide Find out about the 15 methods of contraception available on the NHS, plus where to get them and how to decide which method suits you. Sex and young people Are you ready for sex? What should you do if a condom splits? Is your body normal? Answers to these and more. Vagina health Find out what's normal for a vagina, including discharge, size, periods, childbirth and menopause, and how to keep clean and healthy. Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose. Talking about sex How to talk about sex to your partner, teenager or younger child, and why it's important. With tips on what to say. STIs Could you have an STI (sexually transmitted infection)? Find out about symptoms, where to get tests and treatment, and how to protect yourself. Good sex How to have a healthy and fulfilling sex life. Learn about sexual arousal and get tips on how to keep the passion alive. Fertility Find out about fertility, including getting pregnant, fertility problems and IVF. Trans health Find out more about gender identity issues and read real stories about living as a trans person. Gay health Health information for people who are lesbian, gay or bisexual. Includes sexual health and having children. Menopause Everything you need to know about the menopause, including the effects on your body, how your GP can help you, and what you can do to relieve the symptoms. Getting started Find out about contraception and where to get it Where to go for advice Get condoms from the NHS Freedoms shop Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Pharmacy Pregnancy termination GP Support services for HIV Hospital Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Sexual health self-assessment Are you putting your health at risk? Penis problems: a visual guide A visual guide to penis problems Fertility self-assessment Are you having problems conceiving? Also on NHS Choices Common Health Questions: sexual health Abortion Pregnancy and baby guide Sexually transmitted infections Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Contraception guide All you need to know about contraception, how it works and where to get it Community content from HealthUnlocked Need help now? Where to get sexual health help urgently, including advice about what to do after unprotected sex or sexual assault JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: 26\/02\/2015 Next review due: 26\/02\/2017 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lichen planus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lichen-planus","content":"Lichen planus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lichen planus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lichen-planus Real stories Lichen-planus Clinical trials Lichen planus Lichen-planus Symptoms Lichen-planus Causes Lichen-planus Diagnosis Lichen-planus Treatment Lichen-planus Complications Introduction  Lichen planus is a non-infectious, itchy rash that can affect many areas of the body. Affected areas can include the: arms, legs and trunk  mouth (oral lichen planus) nails and scalp vulva, vagina and penis Read more about the symptoms of lichen planus. The exact cause of lichen planus is unknown. However, the condition isn't infectious and doesn't usually run in families. It can't be passed on to other people, including sexual partners. Read more about the causes of lichen planus. A GP can usually diagnose lichen planus by examining the rash and asking about your symptoms. Oral lichen planus is often diagnosed by a dentist during routine dental check-ups. Read more about diagnosing lichen planus. Who's affected by lichen planus Lichen planus is thought to affect 1-2% of the worldwide population. It's more common in adults over the age of 40. Lichen planus of the skin affects men and women equally. However, oral lichen planus is more common in women. The mouth is affected in around 50% of all cases of lichen planus (oral lichen planus). Treating lichen planus There's no single treatment that can cure lichen planus completely. However, treatments are available to help manage the symptoms and make living with it easier. For example, steroid creams or ointments are often used to help relieve the itch and control the rash. Most cases of lichen planus of the skin clear up on their own within six to nine months. The rash rarely lasts longer than 18 months. However, oral lichen planus and lichen planus that affects the genital area may be more persistent. Read more about how lichen planus is treated. Erosive lichen planus Erosive lichen planus is a rare form of lichen planus that can last a long time. It causes painful ulcers to develop in the mouth and in the genital areas of both males and females. In some cases, long-term erosive lichen planus can increase the chance of some types of cancer developing. Read our page on complications of lichen planus for more information about erosive lichen planus. Lichen planus of the skin usually occurs in adults over the age of 40  Community content from HealthUnlocked Pharmacy and medicines Using your local pharmacy's services could save you an unnecessary trip to your GP Page last reviewed: 08\/10\/2014 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 226 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 65  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Corticosteroids Mouth ulcer Skin conditions slideshow Steroid creams External links BAD: lichen planus BDHF: oral lichen planus Cancer Research UK: mouth & oropharyngeal cancer Cancer Research UK: penile cancer Cancer Research UK: vulval cancer UK Lichen Planus Common skin conditions Facts about some of the most common skin problems, including causes and available treatments Find and choose services for Lichen planus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lichen sclerosus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/lichen-sclerosus","content":"Lichen sclerosus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lichen sclerosus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview lichen-sclerosus Clinical trials Lichen sclerosus Introduction  Lichen sclerosus is a long-term skin condition that mainly affects the skin of the genitals. It usually causes itching and white patches to appear on the affected skin. Other areas of the body are also occasionally affected, including the upper arms, back, breasts and shoulders. Lichen sclerosus is most common in women who have been through the menopause, although men and children are also sometimes affected. It's not clear what causes lichen sclerosus, but it's thought to be related to overactivity of the immune system. It's not an infection and can't be spread to your partner or other people. Lichen sclerosus can be uncomfortable and distressing, but it's usually possible in most cases to control the symptoms with simple treatments. This page covers: Symptoms of lichen sclerosus in women and girls Symptoms of lichen sclerosus in men and boys How long does lichen sclerosus last? Treatments for lichen sclerosus Self-help for lichen sclerosus Symptoms in women and girls In women and girls, lichen sclerosus tends to affect the vulva (the skin around the entrance to the vagina) and the skin around the anus (back passage). Symptoms include: small white areas that may increase in size and join together to form larger patches \u2013 these patches may become cracked and sore itchiness, which tends to be worse at night and may disturb sleep the skin becoming fragile and thin, or wrinkly and thickened red or purple blood blisters pain when having sex and\/or passing stools Without treatment, the vulva may gradually scar and shrink. This can make the entrance to the vagina narrower, which makes sex even more difficult and painful. Symptoms in men and boys In men and boys, lichen sclerosus tends to develop on the foreskin and end of the penis. The skin around the anus is rarely affected. Symptoms can include: sore or sometimes itchy white patches on the penis, particularly around the tip, but sometimes on the shaft the skin at the tip of the penis becoming firm and white difficulty pulling the foreskin back, which can make peeing difficult and lead to painful erections if left untreated For both men and women, it's often easy for a doctor to diagnose lichen sclerosus by asking about your symptoms and examining your skin. However, in some cases, a very simple procedure known as a biopsy, where a skin sample is taken for analysis, may be needed to help make the diagnosis. How long does lichen sclerosus last? For most people, lichen sclerosus is a long-term condition that lasts many years and may flare up and down over time. There's currently no cure, but symptoms can normally be controlled with steroid medication applied directly to the affected skin (see below). Occasionally, lichen sclerosus goes away on its own and doesn't come back, but this usually only occurs when children with the condition reach puberty. Treatments for lichen sclerosus Steroid creams and ointments The main treatment for lichen sclerosus is steroid ointment or cream, which helps to control symptoms. It should be applied regularly, but relatively sparingly, to the affected areas of skin. Your doctor will advise you on how much to use, how frequently, and for how long. Generally, a 30g tube should last around three months. When used appropriately, the risk of side effects such as thinning of the skin is very low. Read more about the side effects of steroid creams. Symptoms tend to ease after a few weeks of treatment, but it may be a few months before your symptoms are fully under control. After three or four months of regular treatment, you might only need to use the cream once or twice a  week, or sometimes even less, to stop symptoms returning. Steroid creams and ointments are very effective in most cases. However, if they don\u2019t help, other treatments may be suggested by a specialist. Surgery In a few cases, surgery may be needed to treat problems caused by lichen sclerosus. For example, if the condition causes a woman's vaginal opening to become very narrow, affecting sex, an operation to widen it may be suggested. Men or boys may need surgery to remove the foreskin (circumcision) if steroid ointments or creams don\u2019t help and the foreskin becomes severely affected. This can result in the condition settling fully. Self-help for lichen sclerosus In addition to the above treatments, the following measures can often help keep your symptoms under control: avoid washing with soap or bubble bath \u2013 use plain water or an emollient wash instead, such as aqueous cream (but avoid leaving aqueous cream on the skin after washing) avoid rubbing or scratching the area gently dab your genitals dry after peeing, to stop your urine irritating the skin apply a barrier cream or ointment, such as petroleum jelly, to affected areas after washing and before and after urinating  avoid wearing tight or restrictive clothes and wear underwear made from natural materials such as cotton or silk \u2013 women may find it helps to wear stockings rather than tights For women who find sex painful, it may help to use a lubricant or a vaginal dilator. Cancer risk Women with lichen sclerosus have a slightly increased risk of developing cancer of the vulva. This affects up to 1 in 20 women with the condition. It's therefore important to check your vulva regularly for any symptoms of vulval cancer, as the earlier any cancer is detected, the easier it is to treat. Check for thickening of the skin or any lumps, blisters or sores. Use a mirror and feel the area with your fingers. Men with lichen sclerosus may have a slightly higher risk of developing cancer of the penis, so it's also important for them to keep an eye out for any unusual changes, such as growths or sores. If you have lichen sclerosus, you should report any changes like these to your doctor. Page last reviewed: 16\/12\/2015 Next review due: 16\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 595 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 256  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 187  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Vagina problems visual guide Penis problems visual guide Steroid creams Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Vagina problems: a visual guide A visual guide to vagina problems, including discharge and herpes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lightheadedness","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/dizziness","content":"Dizziness (lightheadedness) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Dizziness (lightheadedness)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview dizziness Clinical trials Dizziness Introduction  Dizziness is a common symptom that\u2019s not usually a sign of anything serious, but should be investigated by a doctor. The term \"dizziness\" means different things to different people \u2013 some use it to describe feeling lightheaded or off balance, while others use it to describe a feeling that their surroundings are spinning. Because the symptom is quite vague and can be caused by a wide range of things, it may not always be easy to identify the underlying cause of dizziness. This page explains what you should do if you feel dizzy for no apparent reason, and outlines the most common causes. Seeing your GP  See your GP if you're feeling lightheaded or off balance and you're worried, particularly if you also have other symptoms, such as fainting episodes or headaches. Your GP will first want to establish exactly what you mean by dizziness, and check that you're not actually describing vertigo \u2013 a severe type of dizziness, where you feel your surroundings are spinning or moving. They\u2019ll also want to know: whether the dizziness started for no apparent reason, or if it followed an illness whether you have repeated episodes of dizziness and, if so, when you tend to experience these how long the dizziness lasts Dizziness can sometimes be caused by an ear condition. A simple way of distinguishing between ear-related dizziness and dizziness due to other causes is to determine whether it occurs only when you're upright or also when you're lying down. Dizziness that occurs when you're upright is probably not related to the ear. Dizziness that happens when you're lying down is usually caused by a viral ear infection, which can't be treated with antibiotics. It\u2019s a good idea to keep a diary of your dizziness, recording when and where you experience the problem, and take it with you to your GP appointment. It's helpful to note: what you were doing at the time of your dizziness how long it lasted and how bad it was whether you had any other symptoms \u2013 such as fainting, vomiting, nausea, blurred vision, headache, hearing loss or tinnitus If you're taking prescription medicine, your GP will probably review this to check whether dizziness is a possible side effect. If necessary, they can prescribe a different medication for you to try. You may be referred to a specialist for further tests and investigations. Common causes of dizziness The most common causes of dizziness are outlined below. Labyrinthitis \u2013 an inner ear infection that affects your hearing and balance, and can lead to a severe form of dizziness called vertigo. Migraine \u2013 dizziness may come on before or after the headache, or even without the headache. Stress or anxiety \u2013 particularly if you tend to hyperventilate (breathe abnormally quickly when resting). Low blood sugar level (hypoglycaemia)  \u2013 which is usually seen in people with diabetes. Postural hypotension \u2013 a sudden fall in blood pressure when you suddenly sit or stand up, which goes away after lying down. This is more common in older people. Dehydration or heat exhaustion \u2013 dehydration could be due to not drinking enough during exercise, or illness that causes vomiting, diarrhoea or fever. Vertebrobasilar insufficiency \u2013 decreased blood flow in the back of the brain, which may be caused by the blood vessels that lead to the brain from the heart being blocked (known as atherosclerosis). Click on the above links for more information on these conditions. Less common causes of dizziness Less common causes of dizziness include: having a severe illness or condition that affects the whole body using recreational drugs or consuming excessive amounts of alcohol (either binge drinking or long-term alcohol misuse) certain types of prescription medicine \u2013 such as antidepressants or blood pressure medication having a heart rhythm problem \u2013 such as atrial fibrillation (a fast, irregular heartbeat) carbon monoxide poisoning Click on the above links for more information on these conditions. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/01\/2015 Next review due: 09\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1868 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 781  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 599  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 171  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 227  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Fainting Headaches Labyrinthitis Migraine Vestibular neuronitis External links Brain & Spine Foundation: dizziness and balance problems (PDF, 546kb) Vertigo Vertigo is the sensation that you, or the environment around you, is moving or spinning Low blood pressure Low blood pressure, also known as hypotension, is a condition where arterial blood pressure is abnormally low Dealing with panic attacks Anxious? Dizzy? Heart racing? You could be having a panic attack. Get practical tips on how to cope NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Limping in children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/limp-in-children","content":"A limp in a child - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories A limp in a child  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Limp in children Introduction  If your child is limping, it's usually the sign of a minor injury such as a sprain or splinter. However, if there's no obvious cause, see your GP as there may be a serious underlying medical condition.  Advice for parents If your child has started limping, find out if they've injured their leg or foot or stood on something sharp. Inspect the soles of their feet and in between their toes for a wound or blister. You may need to take your child to a minor injury unit. Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if your child has a severe injury or can't put any weight on their leg. If there's no wound or sign of injury, your child may have an underlying medical condition that needs investigating by your GP. This will usually be done by arranging blood tests and an X-ray of your child's hip. If your child also has a fever or seems unwell, take them to your GP as soon as possible. They'll need to be seen urgently by a specialist to rule out a bone infection (osteomyelitis). Childhood medical conditions that cause a limp Some of the possible causes of your child's limp are described below. However, it's important not to diagnose the cause yourself \u2013 always leave that to a doctor. Irritable hip Irritable hip (also known as transient synovitis) is a common childhood condition that causes hip pain and limping. Children with irritable hip may also be reluctant to place weight on the affected hip joint, making it difficult for them to stand or walk. The condition occurs when the lining that covers the hip joint becomes inflamed, although the cause of inflammation is unclear. A diagnosis of irritable hip is only made after other more serious causes of a limp are ruled out. Read more about irritable hip.  Severe viral infection Some viral infections can cause painful joints. If your child has a fever and pain in many joints, as well as a limp, they're likely to have a viral infection. However, make sure you see your GP for a proper diagnosis as they'll want to rule out more serious bone infections, such as: septic arthritis \u2013 a bacterial infection of a joint that severely restricts movement osteomyelitis \u2013 a bacterial infection of the bone Juvenile arthritis Arthritis is often associated with older people, but can sometimes affect children. This is known as juvenile arthritis. Arthritis causes pain and inflammation (swelling) of the joints and bones. A child with juvenile arthritis will feel stiff, especially first thing in the morning, and won't be able to move their joints freely. There's no cure for arthritis, but there are treatments that can slow down the condition and help to control the symptoms. Find out more about juvenile arthritis. Movement of the hip's growth plate (slipped upper femoral epiphysis) Slipped upper femoral epiphysis (where the growing part of the bone in the hip joint moves) is more common in adolescents. This usually happens gradually over time, and tends to affect older children, although it can suddenly happen as the result of an injury. If your child has a slipped upper femoral epiphysis, they should avoid walking or rotating the leg. They'll need to have surgery as soon as possible, to realign the bone and fix it into position. Other causes of a limp Perthes disease \u2013 a problem in the top of the hip, causing the bone to grow abnormally (read more about Perthes disease - PDF, 176Kb) scoliosis \u2013 abnormal curvature of the spine that can cause the child to lean to one side developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) \u2013 an abnormal or dislocated hip that occurred before birth or developed soon after birth severe pain in the lower abdomen \u2013 this can be caused by appendicitis unequal leg lengths \u2013 which has a wide variety of causes a disease affecting the nerves \u2013 such as cerebral palsy Page last reviewed: 29\/03\/2016 Next review due: 29\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 25 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Developmental dysplasia of the hip Irritable hip The National Child Measurement Programme External links Arthritis Care: arthritis in children Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lipid-lowering medicines","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cholesterol-lowering-medicines-statins","content":"Statins - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Statins  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Statins Cholesterol-lowering-medicines-statins Uses Cholesterol-lowering-medicines-statins Considerations Cholesterol-lowering-medicines-statins Side effects Introduction  Statins are a group of medicines that can help lower the level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in the blood. LDL cholesterol is often referred to as \"bad cholesterol\", and statins reduce the production of it inside the liver. Why have I been offered statins? Having a high level of LDL cholesterol is potentially dangerous, as it can lead to a hardening and narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and cardiovascular disease (CVD). CVD is a general term that describes a disease of the heart or blood vessels. It's the most common cause of death in the UK. The main types of CVD are: coronary heart disease \u2013 when the blood supply to the heart becomes restricted angina \u2013 sharp chest pain, caused by coronary heart disease heart attacks \u2013 when the supply of blood to the heart is suddenly blocked stroke \u2013 when the supply of blood to the brain becomes blocked Your doctor may recommend taking statins if either: you've been diagnosed with a form of CVD your personal and family medical history suggests you're likely to develop CVD at some point over the next 10 years and lifestyle measures (see below) haven't reduced this risk Read more about when statins may be recommended. Taking statins Statins come as tablets that are taken once a day. The tablets should normally be taken at the same time each day \u2013 most people take them just before going to bed. In most cases, treatment with statins continues for life, as stopping the medication causes your cholesterol to return to a high level within a few weeks. If you ever forget to take your dose, don't take an extra one to make up for it. Just take your next dose as usual the following day. If you accidentally take too many statin tablets (more than your usual daily dose), contact your doctor or pharmacist for advice, or call NHS 111. Cautions and interactions Statins can sometimes interact with other medicines, increasing the risk of unpleasant side effects, such as muscle damage. Some types of statin can also interact with grapefruit juice. It's very important to read the information leaflet that comes with your medication, to check if there are any interactions you should be aware of. If in doubt, contact your GP or pharmacist for advice. Read more things to consider when taking statins. Side effects of statins Many people who take statins experience no or very few side effects. Others experience some troublesome \u2013 but usually minor \u2013 side effects, such as an upset stomach, headache or feeling sick. Your doctor should discuss the risks and benefits of taking statins if they're offered to you. Cases that involve more serious side effects, such as kidney failure, tend to get a great deal of media coverage, but these are rare. The British Heart Foundation states than just 1 in every 10,000 people who take statins will experience a potentially dangerous side effect. The risks of any side effects also have to be balanced against the benefits of preventing serious problems. A review of scientific studies into the effectiveness of statins found that around one in every 50 people who take the medication for five years will avoid a serious event, such as a heart attack or stroke, as a result. Read more about the side effects of statins. Alternatives to statins If you're at risk of developing CVD in the near future, your doctor will usually recommend lifestyle measures to reduce this risk before they suggest that you take statins. Lifestyle measures that can reduce your cholesterol level and CVD risk include: eating a healthy, balanced diet exercising regularly maintaining a healthy weight limiting the amount of alcohol you drink stopping smoking Statins may be recommended if these measures don\u2019t help. Read more about: treating high cholesterol preventing CVD Types of statin There are five types of statin available via prescription in the UK: atorvastatin (Lipitor) fluvastatin (Lescol) pravastatin (Lipostat) rosuvastatin (Crestor) simvastatin (Zocor) Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/01\/2016 Next review due: 14\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 864 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 251  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 267  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 181  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links High cholesterol Cardiovascular disease Atherosclerosis Heart attack Lower your cholesterol News: NICE draft guidelines on statins External links Circulation Foundation British Heart Foundation British Cardiovascular Society Heart UK: cholesterol charity Yellow Card Scheme Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Eat less saturated fat Eating too much saturated fat can cause raised cholesterol. Follow these practical tips on how to cut down NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lipoedema","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/lipoedema","content":"Lipoedema - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lipoedema  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview lipoedema Clinical trials lipoedema Community Lipoedema Introduction  Lipoedema is a long-term (chronic) condition typically involving an abnormal build-up of fat cells in the legs, thighs and buttocks. The condition occurs almost exclusively in women, although there have been rare cases reported in men. Signs and symptoms In lipoedema, the legs become enlarged from the ankles up to the hips. Both legs are usually enlarged at the same time and to the same extent. The feet are not affected and this creates a \u2018bracelet\u2019 effect or \u2018band-like\u2019 appearance just above the ankles. The hands are not usually affected either, although the arms occasionally can be. The degree of enlargement caused by lipoedema differs between individuals with the condition and it can gradually worsen over time. As well as becoming enlarged, affected areas of the body may: feel soft, 'doughy' and cold be tender to touch bruise easily ache or feel painful have small broken veins under the skin The condition can progress to cause fluid retention (lymphoedema) in the affected legs. The combination of these symptoms can lead to reduced mobility and psychological issues, such as low self-esteem. What causes lipoedema? The cause of lipoedema is not known, but there is a family history of the condition in some cases and it seems likely that the genes you inherit from your parents play a role. Lipoedema tends to start at puberty or at times of hormonal change, such as pregnancy or the menopause, which suggests hormones may also have an influence. Although the accumulation of fat tends to be worse in people who are obese, the condition is not caused by obesity and can affect people who are a normal weight. It should not be mistaken for obesity, as dieting often makes little difference to the condition (see below). Seeking medical advice You should see your GP if you have symptoms of lipoedema so they can try to identify the cause. This will usually involve examining the affected areas of your body to help determine whether you have lipoedema or lymphoedema. Lymphoedema has similar symptoms to lipoedema, and can sometimes develop as a result of lipoedema, but it is caused by a build-up of fluid from the lymphatic system (a network of channels and glands distributed throughout the body) rather than a build-up of fat cells. The skin of someone with lymphoedema will pit or indent when you press it, but this will not happen with lipoedema. Treating lipoedema As there has been little research into lipoedema, there is some uncertainty about the best way to treat the condition. Generally, the main treatment options are non-surgical treatments and liposuction. Non-surgical treatments Non-surgical treatments can sometimes be helpful in improving pain and tenderness, preventing or reducing lymphoedema and improving the shape of affected limbs \u2013 although they often have little effect on the fatty tissue. Several different treatments are designed to improve the flow and drainage of fluid in your tissues, such as: compression therapy \u2013 bandages or garments that squeeze the affected limbs exercise \u2013 usually low-impact exercises, such as swimming massage \u2013 techniques that help encourage the flow of fluid through your body These treatments are similar to the treatments for lymphoedema. Liposuction The only treatment that appears to be effective in reducing the build-up of fatty tissue associated with lipoedema is a procedure called tumescent liposuction. Tumescent liposuction involves injecting a liquid solution into the legs to help numb the area and reduce blood loss, before the unwanted fat is sucked out through a tube. This procedure can be an effective treatment with good results, but several separate operations may be necessary to remove the fat from the different parts of your body. Also, non-surgical treatments may still be needed for a long period afterwards. For example, compression garments need to be worn after surgery to prevent complications such as lymphoedema. Liposuction is not generally available on the NHS, although it may be possible to apply for funding for cases of lipoedema. Treatments that don't work Treatments used for some types of tissue swelling are generally unhelpful for lipoedema. Lipoedema does not respond to: raising the legs diuretics (tablets to get rid of excess fluid) dieting \u2013 this tends to result in a loss of fat from areas not affected by the lipoedema, with little effect on the affected areas Information about you If you have lipoedema, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Lymphoedema or lipoedema? These two conditions can look very similar, but there are important differences. Lymphoedema is swelling under the skin caused by a build-up of fluid in the lymphatic system \u2013 the network of vessels that drains excess fluid from body tissue. Swollen skin caused by lymphoedema will pit or indent if you press it, but this does not happen in cases of lipoedema. A person with lipoedema may eventually develop lymphoedema as well, if the build-up of fat affects lymphatic drainage. This combination of the two conditions is known as lipo-lymphoedema. Page last reviewed: 11\/08\/2014 Next review due: 11\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 202 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Oedema Lymphoedema Liposuction External links Lipoedema UK Lipoedema Ladies UK Talk Lipoedema Community content from HealthUnlocked Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Liposuction Liposuction is not a quick fix for losing weight. Read this advice before going ahead... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lipoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/lipoma","content":"Lipoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lipoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lipoma Introduction  Lipomas are soft, fatty lumps that grow under the skin. They're harmless and can usually be left alone if they're small and painless. Lipomas are non-cancerous (benign) and are caused by an overgrowth of fat cells. They can grow anywhere in the body where there are fat cells, but are usually seen on the: shoulders neck chest arms back buttock thigh They feel soft and \"doughy\" to touch and range from the size of a pea to a few centimetres across. They grow very slowly and don't usually cause any other problems. Occasionally, lipomas can develop deeper inside the body, so you won't be able to see or feel them. Who gets lipomas Lipomas are fairly common, with about one in 100 people developing them. It's unusual to develop more than one or two lipomas, unless you have a rare inherited condition called familial multiple lipomatosis, which causes lipomas to develop all over the body. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you develop a growth or swelling on your body. They can examine it and confirm whether it's a lipoma. When a lipoma is pressed, it should feel smooth and soft, like rubber or dough. It may move about under the skin. If there's any doubt, your GP may recommend that you have an ultrasound scan, a biopsy or that the lump is removed altogether. They may also refer you to a specialist centre if the lump isn't typical of a harmless lipoma. You should also see your GP if you have a lump that: is getting bigger is painful feels hard  grows back after it's been removed In this case, your doctor will want to rule out other types of lump, such as a sarcoma (a very rare type of soft tissue cancer). You can read more about different types of soft tissue sarcoma on the Cancer Research UK website.  Getting a lipoma removed Lipomas don't usually need to be removed unless they're causing problems, such as pain, or if there's uncertainty about whether it's a lipoma. You may want your lipoma removed if it's large or in an obvious place and it's affecting your self-esteem. However, you may have to pay for this privately. Removing a lipoma under these circumstances is regarded as cosmetic surgery, which is rarely available through the NHS. The NHS will usually only fund cosmetic surgery if the problem is affecting your physical or mental health. Some privately practicing GPs can remove lipomas. Alternatively, you can have the procedure carried out in hospital as a day patient (meaning you won't need to stay overnight). Small lipomas can be removed, with local anaesthetic used to numb the area. The doctor will cut the skin over the lump and remove the lipoma, before closing the wound with stitches. After the wound has healed, you'll be left with a thin scar. Lipoma or cyst? A cyst is a sac under the skin that contains fluid and can look like a lipoma. Here's how to tell the difference: cysts are close to the skin surface, whereas lipomas are deeper under the skin cysts are firm to the touch, whereas lipomas are soft, mobile and dough-like with certain cysts, the skin may be inflamed (red and swollen), but it isn't with lipomas An ultrasound scan can easily identify lipomas and cysts. If your lipoma is bigger than a golf ball (5cm or about 2 inches) and painful, ask your GP to arrange an ultrasound scan and refer you to a specialist centre.  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/01\/2015 Next review due: 16\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 557 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 314  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 136  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 65  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breast lump Lumps and swellings Skin cancer (melanoma) Skin tags Swollen glands External links Cancer Research UK: why do I need my lipoma removed? BAD: skin-related patient information Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lipomodelling","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/surgical-fat-transfer.aspx","content":"Surgical fat transfer Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Surgical fat transfer A surgical fat transfer is cosmetic surgery to move fat from one part of the body to another. It's also known as a 'fat graft' or 'lipomodelling'. The aim is to remove unwanted fat from one area (such as the tummy or thighs) and use it to smoothen or increase the size of another area (such as the breasts or face). Although it's a relatively minor procedure, choosing to have it done is a big decision. It can be expensive, the results can\u2019t be guaranteed, and there are risks to consider. It's a good idea to explore the other options for losing fat before you go ahead. You may also want to read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\" Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems   More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, a surgical fat transfer usually costs between £2,000 and £6,500, depending on the size of the area being treated. There may be additional costs for consultations, aftercare and any further treatment sessions you need. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a surgical fat transfer. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care.  You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out your surgery. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? A surgical fat transfer can be carried out under either general anaesthetic or local anaesthetic. It involves three main stages: Removing the fat. Small incisions (cuts) are made in the skin and a thin tube is used to suck out small amounts of fat (similar to liposuction). The incisions are then closed with stitches and a small dressing placed over them. Preparing the fat. Special equipment is used to quickly spin the fat, to separate it from any blood and other fluids. Injecting the fat. A needle and syringe are used to inject small amounts of fat into the treatment area. The injections are given through tiny holes in the skin, so stitches aren\u2019t usually needed. The procedure usually lasts a couple of hours. You may be able to go home soon after the procedure is finished, or you may need to stay in hospital overnight. If a large area is being treated, your treatment may need to be carried out over two or more sessions. You shouldn\u2019t feel much pain during the procedure, but you may have some for a few days or weeks afterwards. You\u2019ll be given painkillers if you need them. Recovery You\u2019ll need to arrange for someone to drive you home after the procedure. You can start driving again when you\u2019re able to do so without experiencing any discomfort. The treated areas will probably be quite bruised and swollen for a week or two. You may want to take a couple of weeks off work. It can take up to six months for a surgical fat transfer to fully take effect, as some of the injected fat may be reabsorbed by your body during the first few months after the procedure. Side effects to expect It\u2019s common after a surgical fat transfer to have: significant bruising and swelling temporary numbness small scars \u2013 these will fade, but won\u2019t completely disappear loss of some of the fat from the injected area during the first few months What could go wrong A surgical fat transfer is generally a safe procedure, but it can occasionally result in: a collection of blood underneath the skin (haematoma) death of fat tissue (fat necrosis) a blockage in a blood vessel caused by a piece of fat (fat embolism) air leaking into the space between your lungs and chest wall (pneumothorax) thick, obvious scars \u2013 sometimes known as hypertrophic scars Any operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. If you notice any problems during your recovery, such as signs of a possible infection (increasing swelling, redness or pain), go back to the surgeon who treated you. If you are not happy with the results, or think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the GMC. More information BAAPS: fat transfer to breast Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 0 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation   How do I choose a surgeon?  Liposuction   BAAPS: fat transfer to breast Is cosmetic surgery right for me? It's a big decision. Ask yourself these questions before deciding whether you want it... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Liposuction","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/liposuction.aspx","content":"Liposuction Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Liposuction Liposuction is a cosmetic procedure used to remove unwanted body fat. It involves sucking out small areas of fat that are hard to lose through exercise and a healthy diet. It's carried out on areas of the body where deposits of fat tend to collect, such as the buttocks, hips, thighs and tummy. The aim is to alter body shape, and the results are generally long-lasting, providing you maintain a healthy weight. It works best in people who are a normal weight and in areas where the skin is tight. Liposuction carried out for cosmetic reasons is not normally available on the NHS. However, liposuction can sometimes be used by the NHS to treat certain health conditions (read more about this in \"More information\"). If you're thinking of having liposuction for cosmetic reasons, think very carefully before you go ahead. It can be expensive, the results can't be guaranteed, and there are risks to consider. It\u2019s a good idea to tell your GP first. Be sure that cosmetic surgery is right for you. Read on to find out: How much does it cost? Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Afterwards Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems   Who shouldn't have it More information  How much does it cost? In the UK, liposuction ranges in price from about £2,000 to £6,000, depending on where you go and the body areas being treated. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform liposuction. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out the operation. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many liposuctions they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve?  Liposuction is usually carried out under general anaesthetic, although an epidural anaesthetic may be used for liposuction on lower parts of the body. The surgeon would mark on your body the area where fat is to be removed. He or she would then:  inject this area with a solution containing anaesthetic and medication, to reduce blood loss, bruising and swelling break up the fat cells using high-frequency vibrations, a weak laser pulse or a high-pressure water jet make a small incision (cut) and insert a suction tube attached to a vacuum machine (several cuts may need to be made if the area is large) move the suction tube back and forth to loosen the fat and suck it out drain any excess fluid and blood stitch up and bandage the treated area It usually takes one to three hours. Most people need to stay in hospital overnight. Afterwards After the procedure, you'd be fitted with an elasticated support corset or compression bandages. This helps to reduce swelling and bruising, and should be worn constantly for several weeks after the operation. You may need to take antibiotics straight after the procedure to reduce the risk of infection. Most people also take mild painkillers to ease any pain and swelling. Recovery  It usually takes about two weeks to make a full recovery. If you had a general anaesthetic, someone would need to drive you home and stay with you for the first 24 hours. You wouldn't be able to drive for a few days. If a small area was treated, you may be able to return to work within a few days. If it was a large area, you may need up to 10 days off work to recover. The bandage or corset can be taken off while you shower. You'd need to avoid strenuous activity for up to four weeks (but walking and general movement should be fine). The results of the procedure aren't always noticeable until the swelling has gone down. It can take up to six months for the area to settle completely. After about a week: Stitches would be removed (unless you had dissolvable stitches). At four to six weeks: You should be able to resume any contact sports or strenuous activities you'd normally do. Side effects to expect  It\u2019s common after liposuction to have: bruising and swelling, which may last up to six months numbness, which should go away in six to eight weeks scars inflammation of the treated area, or the veins underneath fluid coming from the cuts swollen ankles (if the legs or ankles are treated) What could go wrong  Liposuction can occasionally result in: lumpy and uneven results bleeding under the skin (haematoma) persistent numbness that lasts for months changes in skin colour in the treated area a build-up of fluid in the lungs (pulmonary oedema) from the fluid injected into the body a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism) damage to internal organs during the procedure Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems   Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you have liposuction and are not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the GMC. Who shouldn't have it Liposuction isn't a treatment for obesity, and it won't remove cellulite or stretch marks. It's only really suitable for people who have tried changing their lifestyle and found this hasn't helped. More information BAAPS: liposuction  NHS Choices: liposuction for lymphoedema  NHS Choices: liposuction for lipoedema  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 10 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: BAAPS: liposuction Liposuction for lymphoedema Liposuction for lipoedema Tummy tuck Surgical fat transfer Is cosmetic surgery right for me? It's a big decision. Ask yourself these questions before deciding whether you want it... NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cosmetic surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide","content":"Cosmetic surgery and non-surgical procedures \u2013 NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Your guide to cosmetic procedures Are you thinking of having a cosmetic procedure? Whether you're considering a less invasive procedure like Botox or full cosmetic surgery like breast implants, it's a good idea to do your research. You can start by looking up the procedure in the list of information leaflets on this page, or browsing the menu tabs. All cosmetic procedures carry some level of risk. Cosmetic surgery has greater risks than non-surgical procedures. It's important you choose a practitioner or surgeon who is competent to perform the procedure and has the appropriate insurance. Also, make sure you weigh up the costs, as it's unusual for cosmetic surgery to be available on the NHS. You should factor in any additional costs for aftercare and future surgery, and correcting anything that goes wrong. If you're sure you want to go ahead with surgery, you'll need to choose a surgeon and hospital for your procedure and follow the steps from there. Why has this guide been produced? In recent years there has been a sharp rise in the number of men and women opting for cosmetic surgery and less invasive procedures such as Botox and fillers. Worryingly, this comes at a time when an independent review in 2013 (PDF, 1.38Mb) highlighted serious concerns about the cosmetic procedures industry.  The review proposed much tighter and rigorous regulation for non-surgical cosmetic procedures, and made a number of other recommendations to ensure patient safety.  It also stressed the importance of having accurate information and advice available for patients. That's why this NHS Choices guide to cosmetic procedures has been created. This guide should help you understand the risks and effectiveness of different cosmetic procedures, and ultimately help you decide whether cosmetic surgery is right for you.  Making improvements The government welcomed the review (PDF, 1.9Mb) and accepted most of the recommendations to ensure patient safety. The Department of Health has been working with key organisations to implement these recommendations. Improvements are now being made. Doctors who carry out cosmetic procedures anywhere in the UK have been issued with new guidance by the General Medical Council (GMC) to make sure they provide the best possible care for patients. The Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) has also developed professional standards for all surgeons who perform cosmetic surgery. And the RCS will soon be introducing a new cosmetic surgery certification system. This means you will be able to find a surgeon who meets RCS standards for the procedure you are interested in, if you're sure you want to go ahead. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 11 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Types of procedures Botox injections   Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Chemical peels Dermal fillers   Ear correction surgery Eyelid surgery Facelift Hair transplant Labiaplasty (female genital surgery) Laser hair removal  Liposuction Microdermabrasion Nose job   Permanent make-up Skin lightening Surgical fat transfer Tattoo removal Tummy tuck Cosmetic surgery abroad Considering going overseas for your op? Make sure you weigh up any potential savings against the potential risks NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lips, blue","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cyanosis","content":"Blue skin and lips (cyanosis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blue skin and lips (cyanosis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Blue skin and lips (cyanosis) Introduction  If a person's skin or lips turn blue, it's usually caused by low blood oxygen levels or poor circulation. It can be a sign of a serious problem, so it's important to seek medical advice. When blood becomes depleted of oxygen, it changes from bright red to darker in colour, and it's this that makes the skin and lips look blue. In darker-skinned people, the blue tinge may be easier to spot in the lips, gums and around the eyes. The medical name for this blue tinge is cyanosis. What to do Call 999 or go to your nearest hospital emergency department (A&E) immediately if you notice an adult or child suddenly turning blue, particularly if they have other symptoms, such as difficulty breathing or chest pain. This could be a sign of a life-threatening problem. See your GP or call NHS 111 if you have cyanosis that comes on very gradually, or affects just the fingers, hands, toes or feet. This is usually the result of a less serious problem with blood circulation, but it should still be checked by a doctor. Common causes of cyanosis Some of the main causes of cyanosis are described below, but you shouldn't use this to diagnose yourself \u2013 always leave that to a doctor. Cyanosis that just affects the hands, feet or limbs If just the fingers, toes or limbs have turned blue and feel cold, it's known as \"peripheral cyanosis\". The cause is usually poor circulation resulting from: Raynaud's phenomenon \u2013 where the blood supply to certain parts of the body, usually the fingers and toes, becomes temporarily reduced when exposed to cold temperatures peripheral arterial disease (PAD) \u2013 where a build-up of fatty deposits in the arteries restricts blood supply to the legs beta-blockers \u2013 medication commonly used to treat high blood pressure a blood clot blocking the blood supply to or from a limb Cyanosis that affects the skin generally and\/or lips When all the skin and\/or lips have a blue tinge, it's known as \"central cyanosis\" and is usually a sign of low levels of oxygen in the blood. Common causes for central cyanosis are listed below. A problem with the lungs: worsening of a long-term lung condition, such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) lung infections, such as pneumonia, bronchiolitis or whooping cough bronchiectasis \u2013 where the airways in the lungs become abnormally widened a pulmonary embolism \u2013 a blood clot in the arteries of the lungs neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS) or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) \u2013 where the lungs can't provide enough oxygen for the rest of the body drowning or nearly drowning A problem with the airways: choking \u2013 read what to do if someone is choking croup \u2013 a childhood condition, usually caused by a virus, that affects the airways and causes a barking cough epiglottitis \u2013 inflammation and swelling of the flap of tissue at the back of the throat, usually caused by infection anaphylaxis \u2013 a severe allergic reaction that can restrict the airways A problem with the heart: heart failure \u2013 where the heart fails to pump enough blood around the body congenital heart disease \u2013 a heart defect present at birth that can affect how blood travels around the heart and body cardiac arrest \u2013 where the heart stops beating Other causes: exposure to cold air or water being at high altitude seizures (fits) that last a long time a problem with the blood, such as abnormal haemoglobin (which means the blood cannot take up enough oxygen) or polycythaemia (a high concentration of red blood cells) Page last reviewed: 29\/05\/2015 Next review due: 29\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 180 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Find your nearest A&E department Breathing difficulties Does your child have a serious illness? External links Asthma UK British Lung Foundation Shortness of breath Why you should see a doctor if you're feeling breathless Asthma attack: what you need to do What to do in an asthma attack, including how to spot the warning signs and having a personal action plan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lips, sore or dry","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/dry-lips","content":"Sore or dry lips - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sore or dry lips  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Dry lips Introduction  Your lips can become chapped and dry when they're exposed to the sun, wind or cold air. A lip balm containing petroleum or beeswax will provide a barrier and help seal in moisture. More moisture is lost through the lips than through any other part of the face or body. When the lips lose moisture, the skin covering them can become tight and start to split. What not to do It's very tempting to pick and bite off flakes of dried skin, but this will only make your lips bleed and heal more slowly. Irritating the skin around your mouth may also trigger a cold sore if you're prone to getting them. It's also tempting to keep licking dry or cracked lips. But this will only dry your lips more, as the saliva evaporates and the repeated licking or wetting \"washes\" the natural grease off the skin. How to treat dry or sore lips The best thing to do if you have dry or sore lips is to regularly apply a lip balm containing petroleum or beeswax. You may need to try a few different products before you find one that works for you. For example, you may be sensitive to fragranced products, in which case non-fragranced lip balms are available. If you're going to be spending time outdoors in the sun, choose a lip balm with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 to help protect your lips. Lip balm acts as a shield to protect your lips against the sun, wind and cold or dry air. It will trap moisture and seal cracks against infection. Avoid lip balms in pots \u2013 repeatedly dipping your finger into the balm can introduce germs. Covering your lips with a scarf when you're outside during the winter can also help prevent dry lips. When dry lips become inflamed Sometimes dry lips can become inflamed and feel sore. The medical term for inflamed lips is cheilitis. Lips usually become inflamed as a result of mild irritation. They can also become inflamed if they're infected with bacteria or fungi that have entered cracks in the skin of the lips. If the corners of your mouth are red and sore, you may have a type of inflammation called angular cheilitis. This is often caused by bacteria or fungi and is treated with ointments applied to the area. Angular cheilitis can sometimes be a symptom of a type of eczema called contact dermatitis, and is more common in people who wear dentures. It's also more common in older people \u2013 with age, the creases around the corners of the mouth become more pronounced, and saliva can build up in the crevices and irritate the skin. When to see your GP See your GP if your lips are red and sore and you think they're infected. They may prescribe an antibiotic or antifungal cream to treat the infection. This may also contain 1% hydrocortisone (steroid medication) to reduce the inflammation. If you have a non-healing persistent sore, this should be seen by your GP as soon as possible. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/09\/2015 Next review due: 09\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 621 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 287  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 158  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chilblains Look after your skin External links DermNet NZ: inflamed lips Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer Five ways to stay healthy this winter It may be cold outside, but winter needn't be the unhealthiest time of year for you and your family NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Listeriosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Listeriosis","content":"Listeriosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Listeriosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Listeriosis Clinical trials Listeriosis Listeriosis Symptoms Listeriosis Causes Listeriosis Prevention Introduction  Listeriosis is an infection that usually develops after eating food contaminated by listeria bacteria. In most people, listeriosis is mild and causes symptoms including a high temperature (fever), vomiting and diarrhoea. These symptoms usually pass within three days without the need for treatment. However, in rare cases, the infection can be more severe and spread to other parts of your body, causing serious complications, such as meningitis. Common signs of severe listeriosis include a stiff neck, severe headache and tremors. Read more about the symptoms of listeriosis. Where is listeria found? Listeria bacteria have been found in a range of chilled \"ready-to-eat\" foods, including: pre-packed sandwiches pâté butter soft cheeses \u2013 such as Brie or Camembert, or others with a similar rind soft blue cheese cooked sliced meats smoked salmon The bacteria may also be passed on through contact with the stools of infected animals or human carriers. Read more about what causes listeriosis. Looking after yourself at home Over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, can offer some relief for muscle pain and fever, if you need it. If you have diarrhoea, it's important to drink plenty of fluids to replace those that have been lost. Read about the treatment of diarrhoea. If you've been vomiting or feeling sick, it should be fine to avoid eating for a short while. However, make sure you continue drinking fluids, and eat as soon as you can. Eat small, light meals and avoid fatty or spicy foods. Contact your GP if your symptoms don't improve within a few days. 'At-risk' groups Some people are particularly vulnerable to severe listeriosis.  This includes: people over 65 years of age  pregnant women and their unborn babies babies less than one month old people with a weakened immune system, such as those with HIV\/AIDS or receiving chemotherapy Seeking medical help Seek medical help if your symptoms are severe (see below). Listeriosis is usually diagnosed with a blood test. If it's thought that the infection has spread to the nervous system, further tests may include an MRI scan and a lumbar puncture. Pregnancy and children If you're pregnant and show signs of listeriosis, or if you have a young child who shows signs of the illness, seek immediate medical advice. If you develop listeriosis during pregnancy, you'll be given antibiotics to help prevent the infection spreading to your baby. You may also be given additional ultrasound scans to assess the health of your baby. Treatment for listeriosis in infants is the same as for adults, although it's usually recommended that infants are kept in an intensive care unit (ICU) as a precaution. Treating severe listeriosis in adults If listeriosis spreads into your blood (septicaemia) or your central nervous system, you'll be admitted to hospital to receive injections of antibiotics (intravenous antibiotics) while your health is carefully monitored. The length of time you'll need to spend in hospital depends on whether the infection has spread from your blood or nervous system to other organs, such as your brain. Most people with severe listeriosis require at least two weeks of treatment with intravenous antibiotics. However, in the most serious cases, at least six weeks of treatment may be needed. Preventing listeriosis The best way to reduce your chances of developing listeriosis is to ensure you always practise good food hygiene. For example, you should: not use food past its \"use by\" date follow storage instructions on food labels make sure that the temperature of your fridge is 0C to 5C cook food thoroughly If you're in a high risk group for listeriosis \u2013 for example, if you're pregnant or you have a weakened immune system, avoid eating some foods, such as soft mould-ripened cheese or pâté. Read more about preventing listeriosis. Listeriosis and pregnancy Pregnant women are at particular risk of developing listeriosis. This is because the body's natural defences against the listeria bacteria are weaker during pregnancy. Pregnant women are almost 20 times more likely to develop listeriosis compared with the rest of the population. A listeria infection in pregnancy doesn't usually pose a serious threat to the mother\u2019s health. However, it can cause pregnancy and birth complications, and can result in miscarriage. For more information, see: Which foods should I avoid during pregnancy? How can I avoid food poisoning during pregnancy? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Page last reviewed: 09\/01\/2015 Next review due: 09\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 62 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food hygiene Diarrhoea Food poisoning Antenatal care External links FSA: listeria facts Foods to avoid in pregnancy Find out which foods to take care with in pregnancy. Includes cheeses, eggs, meat and the latest on nuts How to prepare and cook food safely How to prepare and cook food correctly to reduce the risk of food poisoning, including E. coli Foods to avoid if you're over 65 Find out why over-65s are at higher risk of food poisoning and what foods are risky Eat well in pregnancy Find out how to follow a diet that's healthy for you and your baby, and which foods to avoid Find and choose services for Listeriosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Liver cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-liver","content":"Liver cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Liver cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-liver Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-liver Community Cancer-of-the-liver Liver cancer Cancer-of-the-liver Causes Cancer-of-the-liver Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-liver Treatment Introduction  Primary liver cancer is an uncommon but serious type of cancer that begins in the liver. This is a separate condition from secondary liver cancer, which occurs when cancer that first develops in another part of the body spreads to the liver. The rest of this article refers to primary liver cancer only. The Macmillan Cancer Support website has more information about secondary liver cancer. Signs and symptoms Symptoms of liver cancer are often vague and don't appear until the cancer is at an advanced stage. They can include: unexplained weight loss loss of appetite feeling very full after eating, even if the meal was small feeling sick and vomiting pain or swelling in your abdomen (tummy) jaundice (yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes) itchy skin feeling very tired and weak Visit your GP if you notice any of the symptoms listed above. Although they are more likely to be the result of a more common condition, such as an infection, it's best to have them checked. You should also contact your GP if you have previously been diagnosed with a condition known to affect the liver, such as cirrhosis or a hepatitis C infection, and your health suddenly deteriorates. What causes liver cancer? The exact cause of liver cancer is unknown, but most cases are associated with damage and scarring of the liver known as cirrhosis. Cirrhosis can have a number of different causes, including drinking excessive amounts of alcohol over many years and having a long-term hepatitis B or hepatitis C viral infection. It is also believed obesity and an unhealthy diet can increase the risk of liver cancer because this can lead to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. By avoiding or cutting down on alcohol, eating healthily and exercising regularly, and taking steps to reduce your risk of becoming infected with hepatitis B and C, you may be able to significantly reduce your chances of developing liver cancer. Read more about the causes of liver cancer and preventing liver cancer. Who is affected? Despite being a common type of cancer worldwide, liver cancer is relatively uncommon in the UK, with just over 4,000 new cases diagnosed each year. However, the chances of developing the condition are high for people with risk factors for the condition. The number of people affected by liver cancer rises sharply with age, with around 8 in every 10 cases diagnosed in people aged 60 or older, although it also affects many people younger than this. Around two in every three cases affect men. Over the past few decades, rates of liver cancer in the UK have risen considerably, possibly as a result of increased levels of alcohol intake and obesity.  Diagnosis and screening Liver cancer is usually diagnosed after a consultation with a GP and a referral to a hospital specialist for further tests, such as scans of your liver. However, regular check-ups for liver cancer (known as surveillance) are often recommended for people known to have a high risk of developing the condition, such as those with cirrhosis. Having regular check-ups helps ensure the condition is diagnosed early. The earlier liver cancer is diagnosed, the more effective treatment is likely to be. Read more about diagnosing liver cancer. How liver cancer is treated Treatment for liver cancer depends on the stage the condition is at. If diagnosed early, it may be possible to remove the cancer completely. Treatment options in the early stages of liver cancer include: surgical resection \u2013 surgery to remove a section of liver liver transplant \u2013 where the liver is replaced with a donor liver microwave or radiofrequency ablation \u2013 where microwaves or radio waves are used to destroy the cancerous cells However, only a small proportion of liver cancers are diagnosed at a stage where these treatments are suitable. Most people are diagnosed when the cancer has spread too far to be removed or completely destroyed. In these cases, treatments such as chemotherapy will be used to slow down the spread of the cancer and relieve symptoms such as pain and discomfort. Liver cancer prognosis Because liver cancer is most often detected at an advanced stage, only around one in every five people live for at least a year after being diagnosed, and just 1 in every 20 people live at least a further five years. Read more about treating liver cancer. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 The liver The liver is one of the most complex organs in the human body. It performs hundreds of different functions. Some of the liver's most important functions include: digesting proteins and fats removing toxins (poisons) from the body helping to control blood clotting (thickening) releasing bile, a liquid that breaks down fats and aids digestion Liver cancer can disrupt these functions or cause them to fail completely. Page last reviewed: 29\/09\/2014 Next review due: 29\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 302 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 142  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Cirrhosis End of life issues for carers Find cancer support services Hep C Campaign Living with cancer External links British Liver Trust: liver cancer Cancer Research UK: liver cancer Macmillan: liver cancer My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services 'I got cirrhosis at 34' After years of drinking too much, Andy Ball was diagnosed with the liver disease cirrhosis Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find cancer support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=Cancer","content":"Find Cancer information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Cancer information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Living with cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Cancer\/Pages\/Cancerhome.aspx","content":"Living with cancer - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Living with cancer Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Cancer, living with Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus One for the Boys: why do men not talk about cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Early cancer diagnosis is key, but that doesn't mean men always get checked out when they should. In this video, actors and sports personalities try to answer the question: Why are men so dumb when it comes to talking about cancer? All NHS Choices videos Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Preparing for your cancer test results If you're waiting for your cancer test results, here's how you can prepare for your consultation. Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a diagnosis and where to find support. Plus watch a video about one man's experience of cancer. Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your priority is medical care. But you can also get help in other areas of life. Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support. Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment. Living with lung cancer Practical advice for living with lung cancer, covering finances, feelings and controlling symptoms. Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions. 'I had breast cancer and then cervical cancer' Juanita explains the impact of cancer on her life, and how charity work helps others and brings her happiness. 'I beat testicular cancer' Former footballer Neil Harris talks about having testicular cancer, including his treatment and telling his family. Cancer: end of life care Information on coping with a terminal cancer diagnosis, including advice on counselling, practical issues and financial help. Talking to your kids about cancer Talking to children about your cancer may be difficult, but these tips can make it easier for you and them. Lung cancer myths and facts We separate the facts from the fiction about lung cancer and its link with smoking and other risk factors. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler talks about her experience of being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. 'I had prostate cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Philip Kissi didn't notice any symptoms. He talks about his diagnosis and treatment. 'My daughter Caron's breast cancer' TV star Caron Keating died from breast cancer in 2004. Her mother, Gloria Hunniford, explains how she coped. Getting started Why a balanced diet is important Keep skin safe in the sun Get help to stop smoking Cut down on your drinking Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Medical Oncology Information and support for mental health Renal units Alcohol addiction Stroke End of life hospice services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Bowel cancer self-assessment Do you have any symptoms? Mole self-assessment Find out if your moles need to be checked Also on NHS Choices Different types of cancer Breast cancer: female Breast cancer: male Bowel cancer Cervical cancer Lung cancer Skin cancer: malignant melanoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Common questions about cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines Breast cancer Information on breast changes to watch out for, plus breast cancer genes, breast reconstruction and mastectomy Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Liver disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/liver-disease","content":"Liver disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Liver disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Liver disease Overview  There are more than 100 different types of liver disease, which together affect at least 2 million people in the UK. The liver The liver is the second largest organ in the body. It works hard, performing hundreds of complex functions, including: fighting infections and illness removing toxins (poisons), such as alcohol, from the body controlling cholesterol levels helping blood to clot (thicken) releasing bile, a liquid that breaks down fats and aids digestion Liver disease doesn't usually cause any obvious signs or symptoms until it's fairly advanced and the liver is damaged. At this stage, possible symptoms can include loss of appetite, weight loss and jaundice. Types of liver disease Listed below are some specific types of liver disease. The links provide more detailed information about each type. Alcohol-related liver disease \u2013 where the liver is damaged after years of alcohol misuse, this can lead to cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease \u2013 a build-up of fat within liver cells, usually seen in overweight people or those who are obese Hepatitis \u2013 which is inflammation (swelling) of the liver caused by a viral infection or exposure to harmful substances such as alcohol  Haemochromatosis \u2013 an inherited disorder where there's a gradual build-up of iron in the body, usually around the liver Primary biliary cirrhosis \u2013 a rare, long-term type of liver disease that damages the bile ducts in the liver It\u2019s important to note that all types of liver disease can cause cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), not just alcohol-related liver disease. Significant health problem In the UK, liver disease is on the increase. Three of the main causes of liver disease are: obesity  undiagnosed hepatitis infection alcohol misuse  These causes of liver disease are all preventable so it's important to make sure: you're a healthy weight for your height; you can use the BMI healthy weight calculator  you avoid drinking excessive amounts of alcohol; read more about alcohol units take the appropriate measures to prevent getting hepatitis, such as getting vaccinated if you're at risk Liver disease Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Alcoholic liver disease is a range of conditions and associated symptoms that develop when the liver becomes damaged due to alcohol misuse. In this video, consultant hepatologist Mark Wright talks about how avoiding alcohol can help those with the condition. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 The risks of drinking too much You don't have to be an alcoholic to risk damaging your health. Regularly drinking just above recommended levels can be harmful Page last reviewed: 06\/11\/2014 Next review due: 06\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 211 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol-related liver disease Cirrhosis Hepatitis Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease Primary biliary cirrhosis External links British Liver Trust: diet and liver disease Weight loss guide Lose weight the healthy way and learn the skills to keep it off with our 12-week weight loss guide Tips on cutting down on alcohol Practical tips on how you can reduce your alcohol intake and the associated health benefits Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Alcohol-related liver disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Liver_disease_(alcoholic)","content":"Alcohol-related liver disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Alcohol-related liver disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Liver_disease_(alcoholic) Community Liver_disease_(alcoholic) Alcohol-related liver disease Liver_disease_(alcoholic) Symptoms Liver_disease_(alcoholic) Causes Liver_disease_(alcoholic) Diagnosis Liver_disease_(alcoholic) Treatment Liver_disease_(alcoholic) Complications   Alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD) refers to liver damage caused by excess alcohol intake. There are several stages of severity and a range of associated symptoms. ARLD doesn't usually cause any symptoms until the liver has been severely damaged. When this happens, symptoms can include: feeling sick weight loss loss of appetite yellowing of the eyes and skin (jaundice) swelling in the ankles and tummy confusion or drowsiness vomiting blood or passing blood in your stools This means ARLD is frequently diagnosed during tests for other conditions, or at a stage of advanced liver damage. If you regularly drink alcohol to excess, tell your GP so they can check if your liver is damaged. Read more about: symptoms of ARLD diagnosing ARLD Alcohol and the liver With the exception of the brain, the liver is the most complex organ in the body. Its functions include: filtering toxins from the blood aiding digestion of food regulating blood sugar and cholesterol levels helping fight infection and disease The liver is very resilient and capable of regenerating itself. Each time your liver filters alcohol, some of the liver cells die. The liver can develop new cells, but prolonged alcohol misuse (drinking too much) over many years can reduce its ability to regenerate. This can result in serious and permanent damage to your liver. ARLD is very common in the UK \u2013 the number of people with the condition has been increasing over the last few decades as a result of increasing levels of alcohol misuse. Read more about the causes of ARLD. Stages of ARLD There are three main stages of ARLD, although there's often an overlap between each stage. These stages are explained below. Alcoholic fatty liver disease Drinking a large amount of alcohol, even for just a few days, can lead to a build-up of fats in the liver. This is called alcoholic fatty liver disease, and is the first stage of ARLD. Fatty liver disease rarely causes any symptoms, but it's an important warning sign that you're drinking at a harmful level. Fatty liver disease is reversible. If you stop drinking alcohol for two weeks, your liver should return to normal. Alcoholic hepatitis Alcoholic hepatitis \u2013 which is unrelated to infectious hepatitis \u2013 is a potentially serious condition that can be caused by alcohol misuse over a longer period. When this develops, it may be the first time a person is aware they're damaging their liver through alcohol. Less commonly, alcoholic hepatitis can occur if you drink a large amount of alcohol in a short period of time (binge drinking). The liver damage associated with mild alcoholic hepatitis is usually reversible if you stop drinking permanently. Severe alcoholic hepatitis, however, is a serious and life-threatening illness. Many people die from the condition each year in the UK, and some people only find out they have liver damage when their condition reaches this stage. Cirrhosis Cirrhosis is a stage of ARLD where the liver has become significantly scarred. Even at this stage, there may not be any obvious symptoms. It's generally not reversible, but stopping drinking alcohol immediately can prevent further damage and significantly increase your life expectancy. A person who has alcohol-related cirrhosis and doesn't stop drinking has a less than 50% chance of living for at least five more years. How ARLD is treated There's currently no specific medical treatment for ARLD. The main treatment is to stop drinking, preferably for the rest of your life. This reduces the risk of further damage to your liver and gives it the best chance of recovering. If a person is dependent on alcohol, stopping drinking can be very difficult. However, support, advice and medical treatment may be available through local alcohol support services. A liver transplant may be required in severe cases where the liver has stopped functioning and doesn't improve when you stop drinking alcohol. You'll only be considered for a liver transplant if you've developed complications of cirrhosis, despite having stopped drinking. All liver transplant units require a person to not drink alcohol while awaiting the transplant, and for the rest of their life. Read more about treating ARLD. Complications Death rates linked to ARLD have risen considerably over the last few decades. Alcohol is now one of the most common causes of death in the UK, along with smoking and high blood pressure. Life-threatening complications of ARLD include: internal (variceal) bleeding build-up of toxins in the brain (encephalopathy) fluid accumulation in the abdomen (ascites) with associated kidney failure liver cancer Read more about the complications of ARLD. Preventing ARLD The most effective way to prevent ARLD is to stop drinking alcohol or stick to the recommended limits: men and women are advised not to regularly drink more than 14 units a week spread your drinking over three days or more if you drink as much as 14 units a week A unit of alcohol is equal to about half a pint of normal-strength lager or a pub measure (25ml) of spirits. Even if you've been a heavy drinker for many years, reducing or stopping your alcohol intake will have important short- and long-term benefits for your liver and overall health. See our drinking and alcohol pages for more information and advice. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/09\/2015 Next review due: 24\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 988 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 542  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 214  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 169  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Liver disease Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Alcohol-related liver disease is a range of conditions and associated symptoms that develop when the liver becomes damaged due to alcohol misuse. In this video, consultant hepatologist Mark Wright talks about how avoiding alcohol can help those with the condition. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol misuse Alcohol poisoning Cirrhosis Liver transplant Find alcohol addiction support External links Change 4 Life: cutting down on alcohol Down Your Drink: are you drinking too much? British Liver Trust CORE: gut and liver disease Lab Tests Online: liver function test The risks of drinking too much You don't have to be an alcoholic to risk damaging your health. Regularly drinking just above recommended levels can be harmful Drinking and alcohol Practical tips to help you cut down, plus information on low-risk drinking, how alcohol affects your health, and understanding units NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cirrhosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cirrhosis","content":"Cirrhosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cirrhosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cirrhosis Real stories Cirrhosis Clinical trials Cirrhosis Community Cirrhosis Cirrhosis Symptoms Cirrhosis Causes Cirrhosis Diagnosis Cirrhosis Treatment Cirrhosis Prevention Introduction  Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver caused by continuous, long-term liver damage. Scar tissue replaces healthy tissue in the liver and prevents the liver from working properly. The damage caused by cirrhosis can't be reversed and can eventually become so extensive that your liver stops functioning. This is called liver failure. Cirrhosis can be fatal if the liver fails. However, it usually takes years for the condition to reach this stage and treatment can help slow its progression. Each year in the UK, around 4,000 people die from cirrhosis and 700 people with the condition need a liver transplant to survive. Signs and symptoms There are usually few symptoms in the early stages of cirrhosis. However, as your liver loses its ability to function properly, you're likely to experience a loss of appetite, nausea and itchy skin. In the later stages, symptoms can include jaundice, vomiting blood, dark, tarry-looking stools, and a build-up of fluid in the legs (oedema) and abdomen (ascites). Read more about the symptoms of cirrhosis. When to see your GP As cirrhosis doesn't have many obvious symptoms during the early stages, it's often picked up during tests for an unrelated illness. See your GP if you have any of the following symptoms: fever and shivering shortness of breath  vomiting blood very dark or black, tarry stools (faeces) periods of confusion or drowsiness Read more about diagnosing cirrhosis. What causes cirrhosis? In the UK, the most common causes of cirrhosis are: drinking too much alcohol (alcohol misuse) over many years being infected with the hepatitis C virus for a long time a condition called non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) that causes excess fat to build up in the liver NASH is on the rise in the UK, due to increasing levels of obesity and reduced physical activity. It's likely that it will overtake alcohol and hepatitis C as the most common cause of cirrhosis. Less common causes of cirrhosis include hepatitis B infection and inherited liver diseases, such as haemochromatosis. Read more about the causes of cirrhosis. Treating cirrhosis There's currently no cure for cirrhosis. However, it's possible to manage the symptoms and any complications, and slow its progression. Treating underlying conditions that may be the cause, such as using anti-viral medication to treat a hepatitis C infection, can also stop cirrhosis getting worse. You may be advised to cut down or stop drinking alcohol, or to lose weight if you're overweight. A wide range of alcohol support services are available. In its more advanced stages, the scarring caused by cirrhosis can make your liver stop functioning. In this case, a liver transplant is the only treatment option. Read more about treating cirrhosis. Preventing cirrhosis Not exceeding the recommended limits for alcohol consumption is the best way of preventing alcohol-related cirrhosis. men and women are advised not to regularly drink more than 14 units a week spread your drinking over three days or more if you drink as much as 14 units a week Read more about alcohol units. Hepatitis B and C are infections you can get by having unprotected sex or sharing needles to inject drugs. Using a condom during sex and not injecting drugs will reduce your risk of developing hepatitis B and C. A vaccine for hepatitis B is available, but there's currently no vaccine for hepatitis C. Read more about preventing cirrhosis. The liver The liver is an important organ, which carries out hundreds of jobs that are vital for sustaining life. For example, it: stores glycogen (a carbohydrate that produces short-term energy) makes bile, which helps to digest fats makes substances that clot the blood processes and removes any alcohol, toxins or drugs Your liver is very tough. It will keep working even if badly damaged, and can continue to repair itself until it's severely damaged. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/04\/2015 Next review due: 15\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 389 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 214  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 103  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol misuse Find support services for alcohol addiction Hepatitis C Liver disease Liver transplant Social drinking risks External links Adfam: support for families Al-Anon: support for families Alcoholics Anonymous Down Your Drink British Liver Trust Lab Tests Online UK: bilirubin PBC Foundation: primary biliary cholangitis The Hepatitis C Trust Alcohol support Realising you have a problem with alcohol is the first step to getting better, but it's often the hardest one Find and choose services for Cirrhosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Haemochromatosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Haemochromatosis","content":"Haemochromatosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Haemochromatosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Haemochromatosis Clinical trials Haemochromatosis Haemochromatosis Symptoms Haemochromatosis Causes Haemochromatosis Diagnosis Haemochromatosis Treatment Haemochromatosis Complications Introduction  Haemochromatosis is an inherited disorder in which iron levels in the body slowly build up over many years, which is why it's sometimes called iron overload disorder. The excess levels of iron can then trigger symptoms such as: feeling very tired all the time (fatigue) joint pain in men \u2013 inability to get or maintain an erection (erectile dysfunction) in women \u2013 absent periods Read more about symptoms of haemochromatosis. What causes haemochromatosis? Haemochromatosis is an inherited condition caused by a faulty gene called HFE, that allows a person to absorb too much iron from food. Normally, the body only absorbs as much as it needs. The excess iron starts building up in the body and causing problems. Read more about the causes of haemochromatosis. Complications If haemochromatosis is left untreated, the extra iron accumulates in the body, usually in organs, such as the heart and liver. This can lead to potentially serious complications such as: liver disease \u2013 including scarring of the liver (cirrhosis) or liver cancer heart failure \u2013 where the heart is unable to pump enough blood around the body Read more about complications of haemochromatosis. Treatment Haemochromatosis responds well to treatment, which aims to remove excess iron from the body. The usual treatment is quite simple. Blood is removed from the body on a regular basis \u2013 about the same amount taken in a blood donation, around 500ml (roughly a pint). This leads to an overall drop in iron levels. For people unable to use phlebotomy for medical reasons, a medication called deferasirox can be used as an alternative. This is known as chelation therapy. Read more about treating haemochromatosis. Screening Routine screening for haemochromatosis is not offered by the NHS because it's a relatively uncommon condition. However, if a close family member (a parent, brother or sister) is diagnosed with haemochromatosis you may want to consider getting tested for the condition yourself. Initial screening is done by blood test. Read more about diagnosing haemochromatosis. Living with haemochromatosis Most people will be able to keep their haemochromatosis symptoms under control, but there are steps that can be taken to keep iron levels low and prevent complications. For example: avoid taking iron supplements and eating foods fortified with iron, such as breakfast cereals reduce the amount of vitamin C you consume, as this increases absorption of iron and helps it deposit in some organs avoid drinking too much alcohol, especially with meals, as this can increase iron absorption and cause liver disease \u2013 if you do have some degree of liver disease you may be advised to avoid alcohol completely Who is affected Haemochromatosis is uncommon in general terms, although it's one of the most common genetic (inherited) conditions in England. As many as one person in 200 may be affected. Symptoms usually start in adults between the ages of 30-50. Symptoms in women are often delayed because their iron levels are reduced when they have a period. Haemochromatosis is most common in people of white European ethnic background \u2013 particularly people of Irish descent. Information about you If you have haemochromatosis, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Haemochromatosis Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Alan was 55 when he was diagnosed with haemochromatosis or iron overload disorder \u2013 a condition where the body contains too much iron. He describes how he learned to manage the condition by changing his diet and having venesection treatment several times a year. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Role of iron in the body The main role of iron in the body is to help transport oxygen in the blood to vital organs. Iron combines with a protein in red blood cells to form a substance called haemoglobin. When we breathe in, the oxygen in our lungs is attracted to the iron in haemoglobin and combines with it to form oxyhaemoglobin. This is transported around the body by blood cells, and oxygen released wherever needed. Iron overload Having too much iron in your body is known as iron overload. Causes of iron overload other than haemochromatosis include: the blood disorder thalassaemia chronic liver disease having a condition that requires frequent blood transfusion, such as sickle cell anaemia drinking beer brewed in iron containers  excess iron intake from iron pills or injections long-term dialysis rare inherited diseases that affect red blood cells, such as atransferrinaemia or aceruloplasminaemia Page last reviewed: 29\/07\/2014 Next review due: 29\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 442 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 244  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cirrhosis External links Haemochromatosis Society Community content from HealthUnlocked Tiredness and fatigue What makes you tired, plus how to boost your energy with an energy diet and other self-help tips NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Hepatitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Hepatitis","content":"Hepatitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hepatitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Hepatitis Clinical trials Hepatitis Community Hepatitis Introduction  Hepatitis is the term used to describe inflammation of the liver. It's usually the result of a viral infection or liver damage caused by drinking alcohol. There are several different types of hepatitis, most of which are outlined below. Some types will pass without any serious problems, while others can be long-lasting (chronic) and cause scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), loss of liver function and, in some cases, liver cancer. This page covers: Symptoms of hepatitis Hepatitis A Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Hepatitis D Hepatitis E Alcoholic hepatitis Autoimmune hepatitis Symptoms of hepatitis Short-term (acute) hepatitis often has no noticeable symptoms, so you may not realise you have it. If symptoms do develop, they can include: muscle and joint pain a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above feeling and being sick feeling unusually tired all the time a general sense of feeling unwell loss of appetite abdominal (tummy) pain dark urine pale, grey-coloured poo itchy skin yellowing of the eyes and skin (jaundice) See your GP if you have any persistent or troublesome symptoms that you think could be caused by hepatitis. Long-term (chronic) hepatitis also may not have any obvious symptoms until the liver stops working properly (liver failure) and may only be picked up during blood tests. In the later stages it can cause jaundice, swelling in the legs, ankles and feet, confusion, and blood in your stools or vomit. Hepatitis A Hepatitis A is caused by the hepatitis A virus. It's usually caught by consuming food and drink contaminated with the poo of an infected person and is most common in countries where sanitation is poor. Hepatitis A usually passes within a few months, although it can occasionally be severe and even life-threatening. There's no specific treatment for it, other than to relieve symptoms such as pain, nausea and itching. Vaccination against hepatitis A is recommended if you're travelling to an area where the virus is common, such as the Indian subcontinent, Africa, Central and South America, the Far East and Eastern Europe. Read more about hepatitis A. Hepatitis B Hepatitis B is caused by the hepatitis B virus, which is spread in the blood of an infected person. It's a common infection worldwide and is usually spread from infected pregnant women to their babies, or from child-to-child contact. In rare cases, it can be spread through unprotected sex and injecting drugs. Hepatitis B is uncommon in the UK and most cases affect people who became infected while growing up in part of the world where the infection is more common, such as Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Most adults infected with hepatitis B are able to fight off the virus and fully recover from the infection within a couple of months. However, most people infected as children develop a long-term infection. This is known as chronic hepatitis B and it can lead to cirrhosis and liver cancer. Antiviral medication can be used to treat it. In the UK, vaccination against hepatitis B is recommended for people in high-risk groups, such as healthcare workers, people who inject drugs, men who have sex with men, and people travelling to parts of the world where the infection is more common. Read more about hepatitis B. Hepatitis C Hepatitis C is caused by the hepatitis C virus and is the most common type of viral hepatitis in the UK. It's usually spread through blood-to-blood contact with an infected person. In the UK, it's most commonly spread through sharing needles used to inject drugs. Poor healthcare practices and unsafe medical injections are the main way it\u2019s spread outside the UK. Hepatitis C often causes no noticeable symptoms, or only flu-like symptoms, so many people are unaware they're infected. Around one in four people will fight off the infection and be free of the virus. In the remaining cases, it will stay in the body for many years. This is known as chronic hepatitis C and can cause cirrhosis and liver failure. Chronic hepatitis C can be treated with very effective antiviral medications, but there's currently no vaccine available. Read more about hepatitis C. Hepatitis D Hepatitis D is caused by the hepatitis D virus. It only affects people who are already infected with hepatitis B, as it needs the hepatitis B virus to be able to survive in the body. Hepatitis D is usually spread through blood-to-blood contact or sexual contact. It's uncommon in the UK, but is more widespread in other parts of Europe, the Middle East, Africa and South America. Long-term infection with hepatitis D and hepatitis B can increase your risk of developing serious problems, such as cirrhosis and liver cancer. There's no vaccine specifically for hepatitis D, but the hepatitis B vaccine (see above) can help protect you from it. Hepatitis E Hepatitis E is caused by the hepatitis E virus. It's usually caught by consuming food and drink contaminated with the poo of an infected person. It's now the most common cause of short-term (acute) hepatitis in the UK. Hepatitis E is generally a mild and short-term infection that doesn't require any treatment, but it can be serious in a small number of people. It can become chronic in people who have a suppressed immune system, such as those who have had an organ transplant.  There's no vaccine for hepatitis E, but you can reduce your risk by practising good food and water hygiene measures, particularly when travelling to parts of the world with poor sanitation. The British Liver Trust has more information about hepatitis E. Alcoholic hepatitis Alcoholic hepatitis is a type of hepatitis caused by drinking excessive amounts of alcohol over many years. The condition is common in the UK and many people don't realise they have it because it doesn't usually cause any symptoms, although it can cause sudden jaundice and liver failure in some people. Stopping drinking will usually allow your liver to recover, but if you continue to drink alcohol excessively, there's a risk you could eventually develop cirrhosis, liver failure or liver cancer. You can reduce your risk of developing alcoholic hepatitis by controlling how much you drink. It's recommended that you don't regularly drink more than 14 units of alcohol a week. Read more about alcohol-related liver disease and the health risks associated with alcohol. Autoimmune hepatitis Autoimmune hepatitis is a rare cause of long-term hepatitis in which the immune system attacks and damages the liver. Eventually, the liver can become so damaged that it stops working properly. Treatment for autoimmune hepatitis involves very effective medicines that suppress the immune system and reduce inflammation. It's not clear what causes autoimmune hepatitis and it's not known whether anything can be done to prevent it. The British Liver Trust has more information about autoimmune hepatitis. Page last reviewed: 07\/03\/2016 Next review due: 07\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 315 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hepatitis A Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Hep C: get tested, get treated External links British Liver Trust The Hepatitis C Trust Saving Lives Drinking and alcohol Practical tips to help you cut down, plus information on low-risk drinking, how alcohol affects your health, and understanding units Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Hepatitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/fatty-liver-disease","content":"Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview fatty-liver-disease Clinical trials fatty-liver-disease Community Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease Introduction  Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the term for a range of conditions caused by a build-up of fat in the liver. It's usually seen in people who are overweight or obese. A healthy liver should contain little or no fat. It's estimated that up to one in every three people in the UK has early stages of NAFLD where there are small amounts of fat in their liver. Early-stage NAFLD doesn't usually cause any harm, but it can lead to serious liver damage, including cirrhosis, if it gets worse. Having high levels of fat in your liver is also associated with an increased risk of problems such as diabetes, heart attacks and strokes. If detected and managed at an early stage, it's possible to stop NAFLD getting worse and reduce the amount of fat in your liver. This page covers: Stages of NAFLD Am I at risk of NAFLD? Symptoms of NAFLD How NAFLD is diagnosed Treatment for NAFLD Stages of NAFLD NAFLD develops in four main stages. Most people will only ever develop the first stage, usually without realising it. In small number of cases it can progress and eventually lead to liver damage if not detected and managed. The main stages of NAFLD are: simple fatty liver (steatosis) \u2013 a largely harmless build-up of fat in the liver cells that may only be diagnosed during tests carried out for another reason non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) \u2013 a more serious form of NAFLD, where the liver has become inflamed; this is estimated to affect up to 5% of the UK population fibrosis \u2013 where persistent inflammation causes scar tissue around the liver and nearby blood vessels, but the liver is still able to function normally cirrhosis \u2013 the most severe stage, occurring after years of inflammation, where the liver shrinks and becomes scarred and lumpy; this damage is permanent and can lead to liver failure (where your liver stops working properly) and liver cancer It can take years for fibrosis or cirrhosis to develop. It's important to make lifestyle changes to prevent the disease from getting worse. Am I at risk of NAFLD? You're at an increased risk of NAFLD if you: are obese or overweight \u2013 particularly if you have a lot of fat around your waist (an \"apple-like\" body shape) have type 2 diabetes have high blood pressure have high cholesterol are over the age of 50 smoke However, NAFLD has been diagnosed in people without any of these risk factors, including young children. Although it's very similar to alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD), NAFLD isn't caused by drinking too much alcohol. Symptoms of NAFLD There aren't usually any symptoms of NAFLD in the early stages. You probably won't know you have it unless it's diagnosed during tests carried out for another reason. Occasionally, people with NASH or fibrosis (more advanced stages of the disease) may experience: a dull or aching pain in the top right of the tummy (over the lower right side of the ribs) fatigue (extreme tiredness) unexplained weight loss weakness If cirrhosis (the most advanced stage) develops, you can get more severe symptoms such as yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice), itchy skin, and swelling in the legs, ankles, feet or tummy. Read more about the symptoms of cirrhosis. How NAFLD is diagnosed NAFLD is often diagnosed after a blood test called a liver function test produces an abnormal result and other liver conditions, such as hepatitis, are ruled out. However, blood tests don't always pick up NAFLD. The condition may also be spotted during an ultrasound scan of your tummy. This is a type of scan where sound waves are used to create an image of the inside of your body. If you're diagnosed with NAFLD, further tests may be needed to determine which stage you have. This may involve a special blood test or having another type of ultrasound scan (Fibroscan). Some people may also need a small sample of liver tissue (biopsy) taken using a needle to have it analysed in a laboratory. Treatment for NAFLD Most people with NAFLD won't develop any serious problems, but if you're diagnosed with the condition it's a good idea to take steps to stop it getting any worse. There's currently no specific medication for NAFLD, but making healthy lifestyle choices can help and treatment may be recommended for associated conditions (high blood pressure, diabetes and cholesterol) or complications. You may be advised to have regular appointments with your doctor to check your liver function and look for signs of any new problems. Healthy diet and lifestyle Adopting a healthy lifestyle is the main way of managing NAFLD. The following can all help:  Lose weight \u2013 you should aim for a BMI of 18.5-24.9; use the BMI calculator to work out your BMI. Losing more than 10% of your weight can remove some fat from the liver and improve NASH if you have it. Eat a healthy diet \u2013 try to have a balanced diet high in fruits, vegetables, protein and carbohydrates, but low in fat, sugar and salt. Eating smaller portions of food can help too. Exercise regularly \u2013 aim to do at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity activity, such as walking or cycling, a week. All types of exercise can help improve NAFLD, even if you don't lose weight. Stop smoking \u2013 if you smoke, stopping can help reduce your risk of problems such as heart attacks and strokes. NAFLD isn't caused by alcohol, but drinking may make the condition worse. It's therefore advisable to cut down or stop drinking alcohol. Read some tips on cutting down on alcohol. Medication There isn't currently any medication that can treat NAFLD, but various medicines can be useful in managing the problems associated with the condition. For example, your doctor may recommend medication to treat high blood pressure, treat high cholesterol, treat type 2 diabetes and\/or treat obesity. Liver transplant If you develop severe cirrhosis and your liver stops working properly, you may need to be put on the waiting list for a liver transplant. For adults, the average waiting time for a liver transplant is 145 days for transplants from recently deceased donors. Alternatively, it may be possible to have a transplant using a section of liver removed from a living donor. As the liver can regenerate itself, both the transplanted section and the remaining section of the donor's liver are able to regrow to a normal size. Read more about liver transplants.  Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 814 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 396  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 229  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol-related liver disease Obesity Type 2 diabetes Cirrhosis External links British Liver Trust: NAFLD Lab Tests Online UK: liver function tests Start losing weight Begin your weight loss journey today with these practical tips, including how to handle snack time and how to fit in more physical activity Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-specific urethritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/non_specific_urethritis","content":"Non-gonococcal urethritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-gonococcal urethritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Non_specific_urethritis Clinical trials Non-gonococcal urethritis Non_specific_urethritis Symptoms Non_specific_urethritis Causes Non_specific_urethritis Diagnosis Non_specific_urethritis Treatment Non_specific_urethritis Complications Non-gonococcal urethritis  Urethritis is inflammation of the urethra \u2013 the tube that carries urine from the bladder out of the body. It is usually caused by an infection. The term non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU) is used when the condition is not caused by gonorrhoea \u2013 a sexually transmitted infection (STI). NGU is sometimes referred to as non-specific urethritis (NSU) when no cause can be found. In women, NGU rarely has any symptoms. Symptoms in men include: a painful or burning sensation when urinating the tip of the penis feeling irritated and sore a white or cloudy discharge from the tip of the penis Read more about the symptoms of NGU. If you think you have NGU, you should visit your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic or sexual health clinic. These clinics have access to specialist diagnostic equipment that your GP may not have. It is easy to find sexual health services in your area. Sexual health services are free and available to everyone, regardless of age, sex, ethnic origin and sexual orientation. Why does NGU happen? NGU can have a number of possible causes, including irritation to the urethra and STIs. Chlamydia causes up to 43 out of 100 cases of NGU. There are many cases of NGU where no infection is found. If no cause is found, you will still be offered treatment for possible infection. This is also the case if inflammation is caused by an object such as a catheter in the urethra, or by using creams and soaps around the genitals. Read more about the causes of NGU. Who is affected? Urethritis is the most common condition diagnosed and treated among men in GUM clinics or sexual health clinics in the UK. There are around 80,000 men diagnosed with urethritis every year. It is more difficult to diagnose urethritis in women because it may not cause as many symptoms. NGU is usually diagnosed after urine and swab tests. Read more about diagnosing NGU. Treating NGU Antibiotics are usually prescribed to treat NGU. You may be given them before you get your test results. Antibiotics are also used in cases where NGU is thought to have been caused by an object, cream or soap. In most cases, only a short course of treatment is needed and symptoms clear up after about two weeks. The most common antibiotics used are azithromycin and doxycycline (Vibramycin-D). It is important that past and current sexual partners are also treated, to prevent any infection spreading to others. After treatment has been completed, and symptoms have disappeared, it should be safe to start having sex again. Read more about treating NGU. Preventing NGU As NGU is usually caused by an STI, practising safer sex is the best way to reduce the chances of it developing. Safer sex involves using barrier contraception, such as condoms, and having regular checks at sexual health clinics or GUMs. Read more about preventing NGU. Complications NGU can have some complications \u2013 for example, the condition can keep coming back. Other complications include: reactive arthritis \u2013 when the immune system starts attacking healthy tissue, which can lead to joint pain and conjunctivitis epididymo-orchitis \u2013 inflammation of the testicles Women often have no symptoms of NGU. However, if it's caused by chlamydia and left untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Repeated episodes of PID are associated with an increased risk of infertility. Read more about the complications of NGU.  Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 77 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Sexual health Chlamydia Gonorrhoea Sexually transmitted infections Why is my penis smelly and sore? Find sexual health services External links Avert: information about sex Brook: find a service FPA: non-specific urethritis Lab Tests Online UK: testing for a bacterial infection British Association for Sexual Health and HIV: guidelines Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Liver transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Liver-transplant","content":"Liver transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Liver transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Liver-transplant Real stories Liver-transplant Clinical trials Liver-transplant Community Liver transplant Liver-transplant Who can have one Liver-transplant Waiting list Liver-transplant How it's performed Liver-transplant Living with Liver-transplant Complications Introduction  A liver transplant is an operation to remove a diseased or damaged liver and replace it with a healthy one. It's usually recommended when the liver has been damaged to the point that it cannot perform its normal functions. This is known as liver failure or end-stage liver disease. The liver can become gradually damaged as a result of illness, infection or alcohol. This damage causes the liver to become scarred, which is known as cirrhosis. Liver failure can also occur very rapidly as a result of inflammation and death of liver tissue (necrosis). Some of the main causes of liver damage and cirrhosis in the UK are: alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD) \u2013 where the liver becomes scarred because of years of persistent alcohol misuse hepatitis \u2013 blood-borne viruses, including hepatitis B and hepatitis C, that can sometimes cause extensive liver damage primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) \u2013 a poorly understood condition that causes progressive liver damage primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) \u2013 a condition that causes long-lasting inflammation of the liver A liver transplant may also sometimes be recommended as a treatment for liver cancer. The only hope for the long-term survival of a person with liver failure is a liver transplant because \u2013 unlike the kidney, heart or lungs \u2013 there is no device (such as a dialysis machine) that can permanently replicate the functions of the liver. Who can have a liver transplant? There is a strict assessment process that decides who can have a liver transplant, as donated livers are scarce. Under UK regulations, you are usually only considered a suitable candidate if you meet two conditions: without a liver transplant, it is highly likely that your expected lifespan would be shorter than normal, or your quality of life is so poor as to be intolerable  it is expected that you have at least a 50% chance of surviving for at least five years after the transplant with an acceptable quality of life Most people who meet these criteria will be eligible for a transplant, although there are a few situations where you may be considered unsuitable. For example, you may not be able to have a transplant if you are unable to stop misusing alcohol, or you have liver cancer that has spread beyond the liver. A series of tests will need to be carried out to determine whether you are suitable for a liver transplant. Read more about who can have a liver transplant. Types of liver transplant There are three main ways a liver transplant can be carried out: deceased organ donation \u2013 involves transplanting a liver that has been removed from a person who died recently  living donor liver transplant \u2013 a section of liver is removed from a living donor; because the liver can regenerate itself, both the transplanted section and the remaining section of the donor's liver are able to regrow into a normal-sized liver split donation \u2013 a liver is removed from a person who died recently and is split into two pieces; each piece is transplanted into a different person, where they will grow to a normal size Most liver transplants are carried out using livers from deceased donors. Read more about how a liver transplant is performed. Waiting for a liver There are more people in need of a liver transplant than there are donated livers, which means there is a waiting list. The average waiting time for a liver transplant is 145 days for adults and 72 days for children.  While you're on the waiting list, you will need to keep yourself as healthy as possible and be prepared for the transplant centre to contact you at any moment, day or night. You should also keep the transplant centre informed about any changes in your circumstances, such as changes in your health, address or contact details. Read more about being on the liver transplant waiting list. Life after a liver transplant Your symptoms should improve soon after the transplant, but most people will need to stay in hospital for up to two weeks. Recovering from a liver transplant can take a long time, but most people will gradually return to many of their normal activities within a few months. You'll need regular follow-up appointments to monitor your progress and you'll be given immunosuppressant medication that helps to stop your body rejecting your new liver. These usually need to be taken for life. Read more about living with a liver transplant. Risks of a liver transplant The long-term outlook for a liver transplant is generally good. More than nine out of every 10 people are still alive after one year, around eight in every 10 people live at least five years, and many people live for up to 20 years or more. However, a liver transplant is a major operation that carries a risk of some potentially serious complications. These can occur during, soon after, or several years after the procedure. Some of the main problems associated with liver transplants include: your body rejecting the new liver bleeding (haemorrhage) the new liver not working within the first few hours (primary non-function), requiring a new transplant to be carried out as soon as possible an increased risk of picking up infections loss of kidney function problems with blood flow to and from the liver an increased risk of certain types of cancer \u2013 particularly skin cancer There is also a chance that the original condition affecting your old liver will eventually affect your new liver. Read more about the possible complications of a liver transplant. The NHS Organ Donor Register In the UK, consent is required before organs can be donated. A person can give their consent to become an organ donor after death by joining the NHS Organ Donor Register or by discussing their wishes with loved ones. Alternatively, a person\u2019s organs can be donated if consent is obtained after their death from an authorised person, such as a relative or friend. The NHS Organ Donor Register is the same in principle as carrying a donor card, but is a failsafe way of ensuring your wishes are made clear. A donor card can be lost or forgotten about, but joining the register will mean there's a permanent record of your wishes that doctors can check in the event of your death. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick and simple, and will only take a few minutes of your time. You can remove yourself from the register at any time, and you can specify what you're willing to donate.   Read more about organ donation. Page last reviewed: 12\/01\/2015 Next review due: 12\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 181 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Liver transplant: Lorna's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Lorna had a liver transplant in 2009. In this video, she shares her experience of having to wait for the right donor. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol misuse Hepatitis C Liver cancer Living with a long-term condition Organ donation Primary biliary cirrhosis External links British Liver Trust: liver transplantation Children's Liver Disease Foundation Join the NHS donor register NHS Blood and Transplant: organ donation Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Organ donation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Organ-donation","content":"Organ donation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Organ donation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Organ-donation Real stories Organ-donation Clinical trials Organ donation Organ-donation What can be donated Organ-donation Living donation Organ-donation How it works Introduction  Organ donation is where a person donates their organs for transplant. There are two types of organ donation: living and deceased. Donated organs are given to someone who has damaged organs that need to be replaced. An organ transplant may save a person's life or significantly improve their health and quality of life. The need for donors Between April 1 2013 and March 31 2014, 4,655 organ transplants were carried out in the UK thanks to the generosity of 2,466 donors. But there are always significantly more people waiting for an organ transplant than there are suitable donors. At the time of writing (24 November 2014), 6,856 people were waiting for transplants. You can visit the NHS Organ Donation website for the latest statistics, including the average waiting times for a transplant. There's a particular need for more people of African, African-Caribbean and south Asian ethnicities to join the NHS Organ Donor Register and agree to donate their organs in the event of their death. This is because donation rates among these ethnic groups are low but the need is great. People from black, Asian and ethnic minority communities are more likely to develop health conditions that can lead to kidney failure, and on average they'll wait a year longer for a kidney transplant than a white patient. There's no upper age limit for joining the register and recording your wish to be a donor. If you die in circumstances where you could potentially donate, specialist healthcare professionals decide which organs and tissues are suitable based on a number of factors, including your medical and travel history. Tissue from people in their 70s and 80s is often transplanted successfully, although organs are only selected from those under 80 years of age. Most people waiting for a donated organ need to have a kidney, heart, lung or liver transplant. One donor can help several people as they can donate a number of organs, including: kidneys liver heart lungs small bowel pancreas Tissues that can be donated include:  the cornea (the transparent layer at the front of the eye) bone skin  heart valves tendons cartilage All donors can choose which organs and tissues they wish to donate. Read more about what organs can be donated. How to donate The NHS Organ Donor Register is a confidential national database that holds the details of around 21 million people who want to donate their organs when they die. Adding your name to the register and telling your family and friends that you want to be a donor will make it easier for them to agree to donation in the event of your death. You can join the register in a number of ways. For example, you can: complete an online form  call the free NHS Donor Line on 0300 123 23 23 \u2013 lines are open 24 hours a day, 365 days a year text SAVE to 62323 Read about how organ donation works for further details about joining the NHS Organ Donor Register and the donation process. Even though about a third of the population have joined the register, less than 5,000 people a year die in circumstances that allow them to donate their organs. This means it's even more important for as many people as possible to talk about donation and join the register so no donation is wasted. Remember to discuss your decision with your family so they're aware. Checking for a match When an organ becomes available for donation, it's checked to make sure it's healthy. The blood and tissue type of both donor and recipient are also checked to ensure they're compatible. The better the match, the greater the chance of a successful outcome. People from the same ethnic group are more likely to be a close match. Those with rare tissue types may only be able to accept an organ from someone of the same ethnic origin. This is why it's important that people from all ethnic backgrounds register to donate their organs. Types of donation There are three different ways of donating an organ. These are known as: donation after brain stem death donation after circulatory death living organ donation These are described below. Donation after brain stem death Most organ donors are patients who die as a result of a brain haemorrhage, severe head injury or stroke and are on a ventilator in a hospital intensive care unit (ICU). These donors are called donation after brain stem death donors. Death is diagnosed by brain stem tests. There are very strict standards for doing these tests and they're always carried out by two experienced doctors. A ventilator provides oxygen, which keeps the heart beating and blood circulating after death. Organs such as hearts, lungs and livers can be donated by a DBD donor. Donation after circulatory death Patients who die in hospital but aren't on a ventilator can donate their kidneys and, in certain circumstances, other organs. They're called donors after circulatory death. In these cases, the organs must be removed within a few minutes of the heart stopping to prevent them being damaged by a lack of oxygenated blood. Both types of donors can donate their corneas and other tissue. Living organ donation Living organ donation usually involves one family member donating an organ to another family member or partner. The relative is usually related by blood \u2013 a parent, brother, sister, or child. It's also now possible to be an altruistic donor. Altruistic donors are unrelated to the patient but become donors as an act of personal generosity. Kidneys are often donated from living donors as a healthy person can lead a normal life with only one kidney. Read more about living donation. Page last reviewed: 24\/11\/2014 Next review due: 24\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 312 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood donation Bone marrow donation Bone marrow transplant Can my organs be removed after I die? Heart-lung transplant Heart transplant Kidney transplant Liver transplant External links HTA: body, organ and tissue donations Join the organ donor register NHS Organ Donation The history of donation The history of blood and organ donation explained in an interactive timeline Could you be a donor? Every year 1,000 people die waiting for a transplant. It's easy to register as an organ donor or give blood NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Local anaesthetic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Anaesthetic-local","content":"Local anaesthesia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Local anaesthesia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anaesthetic-local Clinical trials Local anaesthetic Introduction  Local anaesthesia involves numbing an area of the body using a type of medication called a local anaesthetic. These medications can be used to treat painful conditions, prevent pain during a procedure or operation, or relieve pain after surgery. Unlike general anaesthetics, local anaesthetics don't cause you to lose consciousness. This means they're generally safer, don't normally require any special preparation before they can be used, and you can recover from them more quickly. How local anaesthetics work Local anaesthetics stop the nerves in a part of your body from sending signals to your brain. You won't be able to feel any pain after having a local anaesthetic, although you may still feel some pressure or movement. It normally only takes a few minutes to lose feeling in the area where a local anaesthetic is given. Full sensation should return a few hours later, when the medication has worn off. How local anaesthetics are used Local anaesthetics are usually given by dentists, surgeons, anaesthetists, GPs and other doctors. Some medications containing mild local anaesthetic are also available on prescription or over the counter from pharmacies. Depending on what they're being used for, local anaesthetics can be given as injections, creams, gels, sprays or ointments. Some of the main uses of local anaesthetics are outlined below. Treating pain Slightly painful conditions such as mouth ulcers and sore throats can sometimes be treated with over-the-counter gels and sprays that contain a local anaesthetic. Injections of a local anaesthetic and steroid medication may be used to treat more severe conditions, such as long-term joint pain.  Preventing pain during and after surgery A local anaesthetic may be used along with a sedative medication to keep you relaxed while an operation or procedure is carried out. Local anaesthetics are mainly used for relatively minor procedures, such as: a filling or wisdom tooth removal a minor skin operation, such as the removal of moles, warts and verrucas some types of eye surgery, such as cataract removal a biopsy \u2013 where a sample of tissue is removed for closer examination under a microscope A local anaesthetic may occasionally be used for more major surgery when it's important for you to be awake, such as during certain types of brain surgery, or to prevent pain after a major operation carried out under a general anaesthetic (see below). Epidural and spinal anaesthetics An epidural anaesthetic, often referred to as an epidural, is where a local anaesthetic is continually injected through a tube into an area of the lower back called the epidural space. A spinal anaesthetic is a single injection into a similar space in the back. Both types of anaesthetic can be used to numb large areas of the body by stopping pain signals travelling along the nerves in the spine. They're often used during childbirth to ease the pain of labour, or if a caesarean section is needed. They can also be used to reduce the amount of general anaesthesia needed during some operations and can provide pain relief afterwards. In some types of surgery, such as knee and hip replacements, they can be used in place of a general anaesthetic. Peripheral nerve blocks A nerve block is an injection of a local anaesthetic to numb the nerves supplying a particular part of the body, such as the hand, arm or leg. It may be used so that an operation can be carried out without needing a general anaesthetic, or to prevent pain afterwards. An ultrasound scan is often used to pinpoint the correct nerve. The injection shouldn't be painful and usually takes about 30 minutes to become fully effective. When peripheral nerve blocks and epidural or spinal anaesthetics are used in place of general anaesthetics, they are often combined with sedation to make you feel drowsy and more relaxed. Risks and side effects Local anaesthetics are generally very safe and serious problems are rare. You may have some discomfort when the injection is given, a tingling sensation as the medication wears off, and possibly some minor bruising, bleeding or soreness where the injection was given, but you shouldn't experience any significant side effects. You should move carefully until the anaesthetic has worn off, as you may not notice if you injured yourself. Some people experience temporary side effects from a local anaesthetic, such as: dizziness headaches blurred vision twitching muscles continuing numbness, weakness or pins and needles These problems will usually pass, but you should tell the healthcare professional in charge of your care if you experience any. In very rare cases, you could have an allergic reaction to the local anaesthetic or develop serious problems such as seizures (fits) or a cardiac arrest (when the heart stops pumping blood around the body). Page last reviewed: 18\/08\/2015 Next review due: 18\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 474 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 149  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 162  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaesthesia Dental treatments Epidural anaesthesia General anaesthesia External links RCOA: common concerns and FAQs RCOA: information about anaesthesia Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Epidurals How epidurals work, when they're used, and how safe they are NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Locked neck","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neck-pain","content":"Neck pain and stiff neck - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neck pain and stiff neck  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neck-pain Clinical trials Neck pain Introduction  Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. The pain and stiffness usually gets better after a few days or weeks, and is rarely a sign of a more serious problem. You can get a painful or stiff neck if you sleep in an awkward position, use a computer for a prolonged period of time, or strain a muscle because of bad posture. Anxiety and stress can also sometimes cause tension in your neck muscles, which can lead to pain in your neck. You can normally manage your symptoms at home by following the advice below. Managing neck pain at home For most of the types of neck pain described above, the advice is generally the same: carry on with your normal daily activities, keep active, and take painkillers to relieve the symptoms. You can also take these steps to manage your pain: take regular doses of paracetamol, ibuprofen, or a combination of the two, to control pain \u2013 ibuprofen gel can be rubbed on to your neck as an alternative to taking tablets (always follow the instructions that come with the medication) try holding a hot water bottle or heat pack to your neck \u2013 this can help reduce the pain and any muscle spasms, although some people find cold packs offer better relief sleep on a low, firm pillow at night \u2013 using too many pillows may force your neck to bend unnaturally check your posture \u2013 bad posture can aggravate the pain, and it may have caused it in the first place avoid wearing a neck collar \u2013 there is no evidence to suggest wearing a neck collar will help to heal your neck, and it's generally better to keep your neck mobile avoid driving if you find it difficult to turn your head \u2013 this may prevent you being able to view traffic if your neck is stiff or twisted, try some neck exercises \u2013 gently tense your neck muscles as you tilt your head up and down and from side to side, and as you carefully twist your neck from left to right; these exercises will help strengthen your neck muscles and improve your range of movement You can find more information about neck exercises on the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy website. When to see your GP See your GP if the pain or stiffness does not improve after a few days or weeks, if you cannot control the pain using ordinary painkillers, or if you are worried your neck pain could have a more serious cause. Your GP will examine your neck and ask some questions to help identify any underlying condition. They may also prescribe a stronger painkiller, such as codeine, to take with your usual over-the-counter painkillers. If you have had neck pain or stiffness for a month or more, your GP may be able to refer you to a physiotherapist. If your symptoms are particularly severe or do not improve, your GP may consider prescribing more powerful medication or referring you to a pain specialist for further treatment. Read more about living with pain for further information and advice about persistent pain. What causes neck pain and stiffness? A twisted or locked neck Some people suddenly wake up one morning to find their neck twisted to one side and stuck in that position. This is known as acute torticollis and is caused by injury to the neck muscles. The exact cause of acute torticollis is unknown, but it may be caused by bad posture, sleeping without adequate neck support, or carrying heavy unbalanced loads (for example, carrying a heavy bag with one arm). Acute torticollis can take up to a week to get better, but it usually only lasts 24 to 48 hours. Wear and tear in the neck Sometimes neck pain is caused by the \"wear and tear\" that occurs to the bones and joints in your neck. This is a type of arthritis called cervical spondylosis. Cervical spondylosis occurs naturally with age. It does not always cause symptoms, although in some people the bone changes can cause neck stiffness. Nearby nerves can also be squashed, resulting in pain that radiates from the arms, pins and needles, and numbness in the hands and legs. Most cases will improve with treatment in a few weeks. Whiplash Whiplash is a neck injury caused by a sudden movement of the head forwards, backwards or sideways. It often occurs after a sudden impact such as a road traffic accident. The vigorous movement of the head overstretches and damages the tendons and ligaments in the neck. As well as neck pain and stiffness, whiplash can cause tenderness in the neck muscles, reduced and painful neck movements, and headaches. Pinched nerve Neck pain caused by a squashed nerve is known as cervical radiculopathy. It's usually caused by one of the discs between the bones of the upper spine (vertebrae) splitting open and the gel inside bulging outwards on to a nearby nerve. The condition is more common in older people because your spinal discs start to lose their water content as you get older, making them less flexible and more likely to split. The pain can sometimes be controlled with painkillers and by following the advice below, although surgery may be recommended for some people. More serious causes Your neck pain may have a more serious cause if it's persistent and getting progressively worse, or you have additional symptoms, such as: a lack of co-ordination \u2013 you may find fiddly tasks increasingly difficult problems walking loss of bladder or bowel control a high temperature (fever) unexplained weight loss A serious cause is more likely if you have recently had a significant injury \u2013 for example, you were involved in a car accident or had a fall \u2013 or you have a history of cancer or conditions that weaken your immune system, such as HIV. See your GP if you are concerned. Preventing neck pain You may find the following advice helpful in preventing neck pain: make sure you have good posture when sitting and standing \u2013 read more about how to sit correctly, how to use a laptop safely, and common posture mistakes and fixes take regular breaks from your desk, driving or any activity where your neck is held in the same position for a long period of time if you often feel stressed, try relaxation techniques to help ease any tension in your neck avoid sleeping on your front, and make sure your head is in line with your body (not tilted to the side) if you sleep on your side only use enough pillows (usually only one) to keep your head level with your body   make sure your mattress is relatively firm \u2013 a soft mattress could mean your neck is bent while you sleep Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 10\/12\/2014 Next review due: 10\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2390 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1065  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 688  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 190  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 124  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 323  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Cervical spondylosis Living with pain NHS help for people with pain Shoulder pain Whiplash External links Action on Pain: chronic pain Arthritis Research UK: neck pain Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: neck pain Pain Concern How to sit correctly Prevent back pain and other related pains with these tips on setting up your work station correctly Ways to manage persistent pain If you're in pain, keeping active will help, as well as taking painkillers and doing physiotherapy Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lockjaw","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tetanus","content":"Tetanus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tetanus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tetanus Clinical trials Tetanus Introduction  Tetanus is a serious but rare condition caused by bacteria getting into a wound. The condition can be fatal if left untreated, but the tetanus vaccine and improvements in treatment mean deaths from tetanus are now very rare in the UK. In 2013, there were only seven recorded cases of tetanus in England and Wales, and no deaths. Most cases occur in people who were never vaccinated against the condition or didn't complete the entire vaccination schedule. People who inject illegal drugs are also at an increased risk. This page covers: How you get tetanus Signs and symptoms of tetanus When to seek medical advice How tetanus is treated Tetanus vaccination Tetanus vaccination for travel How you get tetanus Tetanus is caused by bacteria called Clostridium tetani. These bacteria can survive for a long time outside the body, and are commonly found in soil and the manure of animals such as horses and cows. If they enter the body through a wound, the bacteria can quickly multiply and release a toxin that affects the nerves, causing symptoms such as muscle stiffness and spasms. The bacteria can cause tetanus if they get into the body through: cuts and scrapes tears or splits in the skin burns animal bites body piercings, tattoos and injections eye injuries injection of contaminated drugs Deep wounds containing dirt or foreign objects are most likely to lead to tetanus, but the condition can occur after a minor injury you didn't notice at the time. Tetanus cannot be spread from person to person. Signs and symptoms of tetanus The symptoms of tetanus usually develop within 4 to 21 days after infection. On average, they start after around 10 days. The main symptoms include: stiffness in your jaw muscles (lockjaw) \u2013 this can make it difficult to open your mouth painful muscle spasms \u2013 these can make swallowing and breathing difficult a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above sweating a rapid heartbeat (tachycardia) Left untreated, the symptoms can continue to get worse over the following hours and days. In some cases, life-threatening problems such as suffocation or a cardiac arrest (where the heart stops beating) can occur. When to seek medical advice You should contact your GP or visit your nearest minor injuries unit if you're concerned about a wound, particularly if: the wound is deep the wound contains dirt or a foreign object you haven't been fully vaccinated against tetanus you're not sure whether you've been fully vaccinated against tetanus Your GP can assess the wound and decide if you need any treatment or need to go to hospital. You should immediately go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999 for an ambulance if you develop severe muscle stiffness or spasms. How tetanus is treated If your doctor thinks you could develop tetanus but you haven't had any symptoms yet, they will clean any wounds you have and give you an injection of tetanus immunoglobulin. They may also give you a dose of the tetanus vaccine if you haven't been fully vaccinated in the past. Tetanus immunoglobulin is a medication that contains antibodies that kill the tetanus bacteria. It offers immediate but short-term protection from tetanus. If you develop symptoms of tetanus, you'll usually need to be admitted to a hospital intensive care unit (ICU). Treatments you may have include: tetanus immunoglobulin and antibiotics a procedure to remove any dead tissue or foreign material, such as dirt, from the wound medication to relieve muscle stiffness and spasms, such as muscle relaxants and sedatives breathing support using a ventilator (a machine that helps you breathe) nutrients through a tube connected to the stomach or a drip into a vein Most people who develop symptoms of tetanus will eventually make a recovery, although this can take several weeks or months. In the UK, around 1 in every 7 to 10 people who develop tetanus will die from the condition. Tetanus vaccination A tetanus vaccination is given as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. The full course of the vaccination requires five injections, usually given on the following schedule: the first three doses are given as part of the 5-in-1 vaccine for babies at eight, 12 and 16 weeks a booster dose is given as part of the 4-in-1 pre-school booster at three years and four months of age a final booster is given as part of the 3-in-1 teenager booster at 14 years of age This course of five injections should provide long-lasting protection against tetanus. However, if you or your child has a deep or dirty wound, it's best to get medical advice. If you're not sure whether you've had the full vaccination course, contact your GP surgery for advice. It is possible to fully vaccinate older children and adults who weren't vaccinated when they were younger. Tetanus vaccination for travel Tetanus is found throughout the world, so you should ideally make sure you're fully vaccinated before travelling abroad. Contact your GP surgery for advice if you're planning on travelling abroad and haven't been fully vaccinated against tetanus, or you're going to an area with limited medical facilities and your last vaccine dose was more than 10 years ago. If you've never had a tetanus vaccination before, you may be advised to have as many of the three initial doses of the vaccine as possible before you leave (there should be one-month gaps between each dose) and complete the full course when you return. If you've had the three initial doses of the vaccine but no booster doses, having a booster dose before you travel may be recommended. If you've been fully vaccinated with all five routine doses, an additional dose of the tetanus vaccine is usually still recommended as a precaution if you're travelling to an area with limited medical facilities and your last dose of the vaccine was more than 10 years ago. Read more about travel vaccinations. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2015 Next review due: 19\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 529 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 342  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bites Cuts and grazes NHS vaccination schedule Travel health Travel vaccinations External links Fit for Travel: tetanus GOV.UK: foreign travel advice National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC): tetanus Reasons to have your child vaccinated Why it's good for your child and the whole community to be vaccinated, and the dangers of not doing so Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Long QT syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/long-qt-syndrome","content":"Long QT syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Long QT syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Long QT syndrome Introduction  Long QT syndrome causes problems with the electrical activity of the heart. It's uncommon, occurring in around 1 in every 2,000 people. Long QT syndrome is often the result of a faulty gene that's inherited from one of your parents. The abnormal gene causes an imbalance in the chemicals that create the electric impulses in your heart. The syndrome can also be caused by medicines for other conditions. Symptoms of long QT syndrome There are usually no physical signs of long QT syndrome, and some people don't experience any symptoms. The most common symptoms are blackouts or seizures caused by the interruptions to the heart's rhythm. Some people with long QT syndrome find that their heart sometimes suddenly beats in an abnormally fast, uncontrollable way. This type of arrhythmia is called \"torsade de pointes\". When this happens, the heart can't pump blood properly and the brain is temporarily starved of oxygen, causing the person to temporarily pass out. The heart's rhythm usually returns to normal within a minute or so and the person regains consciousness. These episodes can start at any age and may be triggered by: stress a sudden noise \u2013 such as an alarm bell strenuous exercise \u2013 particularly swimming a slow heart rate during sleep However, there isn't always a trigger. Sometimes, the abnormal heart rhythm persists, leading to ventricular fibrillation (a rapid, uncoordinated series of contractions). This rarely reverts to normal without medication and, if it isn't electrically corrected, usually causes the heart to stop pumping (cardiac arrest) and death. Dial 999 to request an ambulance if someone with long QT syndrome suddenly collapses. Perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) until medical help arrives. Long QT syndrome is a leading cause of sudden cardiac death in young, otherwise healthy people, and is often thought to be an underlying cause of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). What causes long QT syndrome? To understand the underlying cause of long QT syndrome, it's important to know how the heart cells work. On the surface of each heart muscle cell are tiny pores, or ion channels. These open and close to let electrically charged sodium, calcium and potassium atoms (ions) flow into and out of the cells. This passage of ions generates the heart's electrical activity. The electrical signal spreads from the top of the heart to the bottom, causing the heart to contract and pump blood. In most cases of long QT syndrome, the flow of potassium ions out of the heart muscle's cells is delayed. This means that after each heartbeat, your heart can take longer to reset itself. Inherited long QT syndrome Long QT syndrome is often inherited from a parent as a faulty gene. The abnormal gene affects the proteins that make up the ion channels in the heart cells. The ion channels may not work well, or there may not be enough of them, which disrupts the heart's electrical activity. Drug-induced long QT syndrome Certain commonly used medicines can also trigger long QT syndrome, including some types of: antibiotics antihistamines antidepressants antipsychotics diuretics heart medications Cardiac Risk in the Young has published a list of medications which people with long QT syndrome should avoid. Drug-induced long QT syndrome usually happens in people with an inherited higher risk of developing it, such as those with slight genetic heart defects. For more information, you can read the Sudden Arrhythmic Death Sydrome's (SADS UK) guide about acquired, drug-induced long QT syndrome (PDF, 158kb). What does 'long QT' mean? Every time your heart beats, it produces tiny electrical signals. An electrocardiogram (ECG) machine traces these signals on paper \u2013 a typical pattern is shown below. As the graph shows, each heartbeat is mapped as five distinct electrical waves \u2013 P, Q, R, S and T. The part of the pattern from Q to T represents the electrical activity of the heart's lower chambers, or ventricles. In people with long QT syndrome, this QT interval lasts abnormally long. In other words, it takes longer for the heart cells in the ventricles to recharge after each heartbeat. This can upset the timing of the heartbeat and may trigger an abnormally fast heart rhythm. Diagnosing long QT syndrome  If your GP thinks you have long QT syndrome after assessing your symptoms, they may recommend that you have an ECG and refer you to a heart specialist (cardiologist). In particular, if blackouts have occurred during exercise, or if there's a family history of sudden cardiac death below the age of 40, specialist assessment is needed. An ECG is a test that records your heart's rhythm and electrical activity. If you have long QT syndrome, the trace of the QT section will be longer than normal. During an ECG, sticky pads called electrodes are stuck on your arms, legs and chest, and connected by wires to an ECG machine. The test may need to be carried out while you exercise on a treadmill, as well as during rest. Genetic testing may be needed to identify the defective gene that may be causing long QT syndrome. It can also help to determine which family members may have inherited the defective gene and need clinical assessment. Treating long QT syndrome  Most people with inherited long QT syndrome will need treatment with medicines. Beta-blockers, such as propranolol or nadolol, may be prescribed to help control irregular heartbeats and slow down your heart rate. If your symptoms are frequent or severe, and you have a high risk of having a life-threatening arrhythmia, you may need to have a pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) fitted. Like pacemakers, ICDs are small battery-powered devices. If the ICD senses that the heart is beating at a potentially dangerous abnormal rate, it will deliver an electric shock that returns the heart rhythm to normal. In some cases of long QT syndrome, surgery may be needed to control the flow of chemicals into the heart. If you have long QT syndrome caused by taking medication, your medication will be reviewed. It may be possible to prescribe alternative medication that doesn't adversely affect your QT interval. Living with long QT syndrome With appropriate treatment, such as medication or surgery, it should be possible to lead a relatively normal lifestyle. However, you may need to make some lifestyle adjustments to reduce your risk of having blackouts. For example, your doctor may advise you not to exercise strenuously or play contact sports, and to try to avoid startling noises, such as alarm clocks or telephones with loud ringtones. Avoiding stressful situations may also be recommended. Your doctor may prescribe potassium supplements or suggest that you increase the amount of potassium-rich foods in your diet. Good sources of potassium include: fruit \u2013 such as bananas vegetables pulses nuts and seeds milk fish shellfish beef chicken turkey bread Always tell medical staff that you have long QT syndrome. Any new medication, both prescription or over-the-counter, will need to be carefully checked to see if it's suitable for you. Information about you If you have long QT syndrome, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register.   How the heart works The heart has two upper chambers (the left and right atria) and two lower chambers (the left and right ventricles). The atria and ventricles have walls of muscle. A heartbeat happens when the muscle suddenly contracts (tightens) so that the chambers become smaller and the blood inside is squeezed out. The control of the heartbeat starts with a small clump of cells in the right atrium, called the sinoatrial node (the heart's natural pacemaker). This sends out electrical impulses through the atrial muscle to another clump of cells called the atrioventricular (AV) node, located between the atria and ventricles. The impulse then continues through the AV node and down the fibres that conduct the electrical impulse into the muscle of the ventricles. The AV node determines the rate of contraction of the ventricles. The pulse you can feel when you hold your wrist is due to the contraction of the ventricles. Page last reviewed: 12\/02\/2015 Next review due: 12\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 171 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Beta-blockers Fainting Pacemaker implantation Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) External links Arrhythmia Alliance: what is an arrhythmia? SADS UK: long QT syndrome Electrocardiogram (ECG) An ECG is a simple test to check your heart's rhythm and electrical activity Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Long-sightedness","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Long-sightedness","content":"Long-sightedness - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Long-sightedness  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Long-sightedness Clinical trials Long-sightedness Long-sightedness Symptoms Long-sightedness Causes Long-sightedness Diagnosis Long-sightedness Treatment Long-sightedness Complications Introduction  Long-sightedness, also known as hyperopia, affects a person's ability to see objects close to them. Vision problems such as long-sightedness are often referred to as refractive errors. If you are long-sighted, you will usually be able to see distant objects clearly, but nearby objects will be out of focus. Your eyes may also get tired easily. Read more about the symptoms of long-sightedness. What causes long-sightedness? Long-sightedness occurs when the: eyeball is too short cornea is not curved enough lens is not thick enough The cornea is the transparent layer at the front of the eye, and the lens focuses light on to the retina (the light-sensitive layer at the back of the eye). There are various causes of long-sightedness, including age, genetics and certain underlying medical conditions, such as diabetes (where there is too much glucose in the blood). Children are sometimes born long-sighted. The problem usually corrects itself as the child's eyes develop. However, it is important for children to have regular eyes tests, because long-sightedness that does not correct itself can lead to other eye-related problems (see below). Adults can also develop long-sightedness, which often becomes more noticeable after the age of 40. Age-related long-sightedness is known as presbyopia. Read more about the causes of long-sightedness. Diagnosing long-sightedness Refractive errors, such as long-sightedness, are usually identified during early eye examinations. Your child will have their eyesight checked regularly as part of the routine screening programme. However, you can have their eyes tested at any time if you are concerned about their vision. Find your nearest optician. In most cases, long-sightedness can be easily corrected; however, if left untreated, it could cause more serious complications that will affect your child's vision permanently (see below). Eye tests for children are free up until the age of 16 (under 19 for those in full-time education). Read more about NHS eye care services and diagnosing long-sightedness. Treating long-sightedness Long-sightedness is often corrected using either glasses or contact lenses. Several surgical techniques have also been developed to treat the condition. Laser surgery is sometimes used, although it is not suitable for everyone. Read more about treating long-sightedness. Complications of long-sightedness In adults, complications of long-sightedness are rare. In children, severe hyperopia can cause them to \"over-focus\", leading to double vision. This, in turn, can lead to two possible eye-related conditions, which are: a squint (strabismus) \u2013 where the eyes are not properly aligned with each other and focus on different things lazy eye (amblyopia) \u2013 where one eye becomes dominant Read more about the complications of long-sightedness. JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Look after your eyes Why regular eye tests are important and how a healthy lifestyle can help you maintain good vision Page last reviewed: 09\/07\/2014 Next review due: 09\/07\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 197 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Short-sightedness Eye health Eye tests for children Find an opticians External links Eyecare Trust SeeAbility Look after your eyes: long0sightedness Royal College of Opthalmologists: laser eye surgery Eyecare services FAQ Find out what health professionals you will meet at your local optician, how to complain if things go wrong and other useful tips about NHS eye services NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Loss of libido","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/loss-of-libido","content":"Loss of libido (sex drive) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Loss of libido  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Loss of libido Introduction  Loss of libido (sex drive) is a common problem affecting up to one in five men \u2013 and even more women \u2013 at some point in their life. It's often linked to professional and personal stress, or important life-changing events such as pregnancy, childbirth or breastfeeding. However, an unexpected loss of libido \u2013 especially when it lasts for a long time or keeps returning \u2013 can also indicate an underlying personal, medical or lifestyle problem, which can be upsetting to both partners in a relationship. If you're concerned about your libido, especially if your diminished sex drive distresses you or affects your relationship, make an appointment to see your GP to discuss any underlying causes and possible medical or psychological treatments. Doctors at your nearest family planning clinic, Integrated Sexual Health clinic, or Contraceptive and Sexual Health (CASH) clinic may also be able to help. In the meantime, you may find the following information useful. It explains some of the most common reasons for loss of libido. Relationship problems The first thing you should consider is whether you're happy in your relationship. Do you have any doubts or worries that may be the real reason for your loss of sexual desire? If you've been in a relationship for a long time, you may have become overfamiliar with your partner and feel a degree of erotic dissatisfaction. This is quite common and can have a negative effect on your sex drive. Relationship problems are among the most common causes of loss of libido. For help and advice, you may find it useful to contact the relationship support charity Relate. Another thing to consider is whether the problem is a performance issue that makes sex difficult or unfulfilling. For example, many men experience ejaculation problems or erectile dysfunction, and women can experience painful sex or vaginismus (when the muscles around the vagina tighten involuntarily before penetration). See your GP if these problems are an issue, as they're often treatable. Your GP may feel you will benefit from psychosexual counselling. This is a form of relationship therapy where you and your partner can discuss any sexual or emotional issues that may be contributing to your loss of libido. Read let's talk about sex for more information about this. Stress, anxiety and exhaustion Stress, anxiety and exhaustion can be all-consuming and have a major impact on your happiness. If you feel you're constantly tired, stressed or anxious, you may need to make some lifestyle changes or speak to your GP for advice. For more information and advice, you may find some of the following pages useful: Why am I tired all the time? Why do I feel anxious and panicky? Self-help tips to fight fatigue Beating stress at work Relaxation tips to relieve stress 10 stress busters Depression Depression is very different from simply feeling unhappy, miserable or fed up for a short while. It's a serious illness where you may have feelings of extreme sadness that can last for a long time. These feelings are severe enough to interfere with your daily life, including your sex life. You're probably depressed if you're feeling low or hopeless, or you've lost interest or pleasure in doing things you used to enjoy. In this case it's really important to see your GP. They may feel you'll benefit from antidepressants. However, low sex drive can also be a side effect of many antidepressants. Speak to your GP if you're already taking antidepressants and think they may be causing your problems, as you may be able to switch to a different medication. Drugs and alcohol Drinking excess amounts of alcohol can reduce your sex drive, so it's a good idea to moderate your intake to no more than three to four units a day if you're a man, and no more than two to three units a day if you're a woman. Read more about alcohol misuse and find out how to get support for a drinking problem. Drug misuse is also linked to a loss of sex drive. Read more about drugs for information and advice. Getting older Many people lose some interest in sex as they get older, mainly as a result of falling levels of sex hormones, age-related health problems, or the side effects of medication. Older men especially can develop low testosterone levels, which can cause fatigue, depression and a reduced sex drive. Speak to your GP if you're concerned about this. They may carry out a blood test to check your testosterone level and can tell you about treatments if your level is low. As women start to approach the menopause, levels of the female hormone oestrogen begin to fall, which can affect libido. Women can also suffer from low testosterone levels, especially after a hysterectomy. Testosterone is another hormone that can affect sex drive. Speak to your GP if you're concerned the menopause may be having an effect on your libido. They may be able to offer you a trial of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) if it's suitable for you. Hormonal problems Less commonly, low libido may be caused by an underactive thyroid. This is where your thyroid gland (located in the neck) doesn't produce enough hormones. Common signs of an underactive thyroid are tiredness, weight gain and feeling depressed. An underactive thyroid is easily treated by taking hormone tablets to replace the hormones your thyroid isn't making. Learn more about treating underactive thyroid. A hormonal problem called hyperprolactinaemia can also have a negative effect on your sex drive. This is where you have a raised level of a substance called prolactin in your blood. Contraception Some women have reported a decreased sex drive while using some types of hormonal contraception, such as: combined contraception, including the combined pill, vaginal ring, or contraceptive patch the progestogen-only pill the contraceptive implant the Depo-Provera injection However, side effects of these contraceptives tend to improve within a few months and they're generally well tolerated. Speak to your GP or local contraceptive (or family planning) clinic if you're worried your contraception is causing a loss of libido. They may suggest trying an alternative method. Read more about choosing a method of contraception. Other medical conditions Long-term (chronic) medical conditions such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes and obesity can also have a negative effect on your libido. Medication Certain medications can sometimes reduce libido, such as: medication for high blood pressure, including diuretics medications for depression, including SSRI antidepressants medications for seizures (fits) medications commonly used to treat psychosis (a mental condition where a person can't distinguish between reality and their imagination), such as haloperidol, as well as many other conditions medicines such as cimetidine, finasteride and cyproterone, which block the effects or reduce the production of testosterone See your GP if you're worried that medication you're taking is responsible for your reduced sex drive. They can review your medication and switch your prescription to something less likely to affect your libido if necessary. Page last reviewed: 23\/01\/2015 Next review due: 23\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 352 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 92  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Depression Facing the menopause together Female sexual problems Male sexual problems External links Institute of Psychosexual Medicine Relate Keep the passion alive How couples can keep their sex life fun and fulfilling, even if they have different levels of desire Good sex How to have a fulfilling sex life, including sex tips, and talking to your partner NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Good sex","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/goodsex\/Pages\/goodsexhome.aspx","content":"Good sex - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Good sex Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Good sex Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Good sex tips Ways to improve your sex life, including being more sensual and getting to know your partner's body. Sexual arousal in women What happens in a woman's body when she is sexually aroused, from initial excitement to after orgasm. Sexual arousal in men The four stages of male sexual arousal, including excitement, plateau, orgasm and resolution. Benefits of love and sex Love and sex can help your health and wellbeing in many ways, including helping you cope with stress. Let's talk about sex A psychosexual therapist explains why talking about sex is important, especially if there's a sexual problem. Male sexual problems Summary of male sexual problems, such as not being able to get or keep and erection, and premature ejaculation. Links to in-depth information. Female sexual problems Orgasm problems, pain during sex, loss of desire and where to get help and support. With video. Sex after hysterectomy How a hysterectomy might affect your sex life, physically and emotionally. Includes menopause and sex. Sex advice for people with chronic pain Chronic pain sufferers can see their sex life fizzle out. Read advice on how to revive sex with your partner. Masturbation Q&A Is masturbation normal, and is it possible to masturbate too much? We sort fact from myth to answer your questions. Keep the passion alive Advice from psychosexual therapist Denise Knowles about keeping the lust alive in your relationship. Sex as you get older How to have a fulfilling sex life as you get older, including dealing with menopause and erection problems. With video. Sex after the menopause When the menopause hits, so can sexual problems. But don\u2019t despair, there is a range of solutions available. Getting started Find a sexual therapist Choose contraception that suits you How to talk to your partner about sex Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Sexual health information and support Information and support for mental health Alcohol addiction Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked Tools Are you a healthy weight? Check your weight and get tailored advice How fit are you? Find out if your activity levels need a boost Safer sex quiz Are you putting your health at risk? Could you be depressed? Take this short test to find out Also on NHS Choices Why sex can hurt What is an orgasm? What can cause orgasm problems in women? Why can't I get and keep an erection? Erectile dysfunction Menopause Vaginismus Sex in pregnancy The facts about having sex when you're pregnant, including positions and what to do if you're not in the mood. Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens Gay health issues The health issues that affect you if you're gay, lesbian or bisexual, with practical advice on how to stay well Five steps to mental wellbeing Feel happier with these five evidence-based steps to improving your mental wellbeing Menopause Find out about HRT, early menopause, supporting your partner and how to deal with symptoms NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Loss of vision","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Visual-impairment","content":"Blindness and vision loss - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blindness and vision loss  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Visual-impairment Clinical trials Blindness and vision loss Information and advice for people with vision loss  In the UK, there are almost 2 million people living with sight loss. Of these, around 360,000 are registered as blind or partially sighted. Being told you have a visual impairment that can't be treated can be difficult to come to terms with. Some people go through a process similar to bereavement, where they experience a range of emotions including shock, anger, and denial, before eventually coming to accept their condition. If you're blind or partially sighted, you may be referred to a specialist low-vision clinic, which is often located within a hospital. Staff at the clinic can help you understand your condition and come to terms with your diagnosis. They can also advise you about practical things, such as lighting and vision aids, and let you know about further sources of help and support. Ask your local hospital if they have an Eye Clinic Liaison Officer (ECLO), whose role involves providing support to people with vision loss in eye clinics. Support groups If you're blind or partially sighted, you may find it helpful to contact a support group for people with vision loss. Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) The Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) is the UK\u2019s leading charity for people with vision loss, and it has a useful page on its website about coming to terms with sight loss. The RNIB's helpline is open Monday to Friday from 8.45am to 5.30pm. The number is 0303 123 9999, with calls costing no more than a standard rate call to an 01 or 02 number. You can also email helpline staff (helpline@rnib.org.uk). The RNIB's website is specially designed for people with sight loss and provides a wide range of useful information and resources, including an online community and online shop. Action for Blind People Action for Blind People is another national charity that provides blind and partially sighted people with practical help and support. For example, the charity can provide you with support and information about the day-to-day practicalities of living with a visual impairment, such as adjusting your home to make it easier to get around. Other national charities Other national charities that specialise in vision loss and you may find useful include: The Macular Society \u2013 helpline: 0300 3030 111 International Glaucoma Association \u2013 helpline: 01233 64 8170 RP Fighting Blindness \u2013 helpline: 0845 123 2354 or email: helpline@rpfightblindness.org.uk Diabetes UK \u2013 0345 123 2399 or email: info@diabetes.org.uk Blind Veterans UK \u2013 020 7723 5021 Local organisations There are also many local voluntary organisations around the country that help and support people with vision problems. You can search by postcode on a website called Visionary to find local support organisations near you. Registering as blind or partially sighted If your vision has deteriorated to a certain level, you may choose to register as visually impaired. Depending on the severity of your vision loss you'll either be registered as sight impaired (previously \"partially sighted\") or severely sight impaired (previously \"blind\"). Your eye specialist (ophthalmologist) will measure your visual acuity (ability to see detail at a distance) and your field of vision (how much you can see from the side of your eye when looking straight ahead). These measurements will help your ophthalmologist determine whether you\u2019re eligible to be certified as sight impaired or severely sight impaired. If you are, they will complete an official certificate with the results of your eye examination. In England and Wales this certificate is called the Certificate of Vision Impairment (CVI), in Scotland it\u2019s called BP1, and in Northern Ireland it\u2019s called A655. Your ophthalmologist will send a copy of the certificate to you, a copy to your GP and a copy to your local social services department. Upon receiving the certificate, your local social services team will contact you to ask whether you want to be added to its register of visually impaired people. After you're registered, social services will contact you again to arrange for an assessment to be carried out. The aim is to assess your needs and find out what help you require to remain independent, such as help with cleaning and cooking, or help with mobility and transport. Registering as visually impaired isn't compulsory, but it can entitle you to a range of benefits including: Disability Living Allowance (DLA) or Personal Independence Payment (PIP) \u2013 a tax-free benefit to help with any costs relating to your disability or illness a reduction in the TV licence fee a tax allowance reduced fees on public transport parking concessions The RNIB website has more information about registering your sight loss. You can also read more about registering vision impairment on GOV.UK. Changes to your home Most visually impaired people can continue to live at home. However, you'll probably need to make some changes to your home, particularly if you live on your own. Below is a list of some important pieces of equipment you may find useful. Big-button telephone \u2013 both landline and mobile models are available from the RNIB online shop. Computer \u2013 the internet can provide a real sense of connection to friends and family as well as other people with a visual impairment. It's also a practical way of finding out information and obtaining goods and services. Big-button keyboards, screen display software and text readers are available from the RNIB. Community alarm \u2013 this small, wearable device has an alarm button which, if pressed, sends an alarm signal to a response centre, which will alert a nominated friend or carer. Your local authority should be able to provide you with further information. Bright lighting \u2013 bright light bulbs and adjustable lights are essential for your home, particularly in the kitchen and the stairs (areas where you're most likely to have an accident). Fluorescent bulbs are recommended because they produce the most light and tend to be cheaper in the long term than conventional bulbs. The way your house is painted can also make it easier to find your way around. Using a two-tone contrast approach, such as black and white, can make it easier to tell the difference between nearby objects, such as a door and its handle or the stairs and its handrail. Reading and writing There are several options available if you're having problems reading standard text in books, newspapers and magazines. One of the simplest options is to use a magnifying device that can make print appear bigger to help you read. These can be obtained from a number of places including hospital low vision services, optometrists, local voluntary organisations, and the RNIB. The RNIB also has a collection of large print publications you can borrow, as do most libraries. You could also use an e-reader to help you read. E-readers are handheld devices that allow you to download books and subscribe to newspapers and magazines on the internet. You can choose a setting that allows you to display text at a larger size. If you're unable to read at all you could sign up to the: National Talking Newspapers and Magazines scheme, which can provide audio versions of more than 230 titles online or on a CD RNIB Talking Books Service, where you're sent audio books to listen to on your computer or on a device known as a DAISY player You can also install screen-reading software on your computer that will read out emails, documents and text on the internet. A charity called Communication for Blind and Disabled People has released a free screen reader for the PC called Thunder. Similar software is available for Apple devices, although you may have to pay a small fee. There are also voice recognition programmes where you speak into a microphone and the software translates what you say into writing. These programmes can also be used to issue commands, such as closing down the internet and moving from one website to another. Braille Some people with severe sight loss, particularly those who've had the problem from a young age, choose to learn Braille. Braille is a writing system where raised dots are used as a substitute for written letters. As well as Braille versions of books and magazines, you can buy Braille display units, which can be attached to computers that allow you to read the text displayed on a computer screen. Braille computer keyboards are also available. The RNIB website has more information about reading and Braille. Getting around There are several different methods you can use to get around independently if you have a problem with your vision. Long cane You may find a long cane useful when travelling. These type of canes are usually foldable and can help you get around by detecting objects in your path. The cane will also make drivers and other pedestrians aware that you have sight loss. To get the most from a long cane, it's a good idea to attend a training course that will teach you how to use it. The RNIB or Guide Dogs can provide you with further details about training. Guide dogs The charity Guide Dogs has been providing guide dogs for people with vision loss for many years. Guide dogs can help you get around, and provide both a sense of independence and companionship. If you apply for a guide dog, Guide Dogs provide all the essential equipment free of charge and can also offer financial assistance if needed for things like food or vet costs. You don't need to have lost all your sight to benefit from a guide dog and you don't have to be officially registered as blind or partially-sighted to apply for one. The Guide Dogs website has more information about applying for a guide dog. Guide Dogs also offer a number of other services for people with a visual impairment (even if you don't have a guide dog), such as Children and Young People's Services and mobility training. The charity also provides the My Guide service, which aims to reduce the isolation that many people with sight loss experience, helping to rebuild their confidence and regain their independence. Global positioning system (GPS) A global positioning system (GPS) is a navigational aid that uses signals from satellites to tell you where you are and help plan your journeys. GPS devices are available as stand-alone units that can be programmed using a Braille keyboard, which tell you your current location and give you directions to where you want to go. If you have a smartphone, there are a number of GPS apps you can download. The RNIB website has more information about technology and products for people with sight loss, including GPS. Driving If you're diagnosed with a condition that affects your vision, you have a legal obligation to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA). Failure to do so is a crime and can result in a fine of up to £1,000. Visit GOV.UK for more information about driving with a disability or a health condition. If you're registered as having a sight impairment, the DVLA will assume your driving licence is no longer valid and you'll no longer be able to drive. Exceptions are occasionally made for people with mild vision impairment. If you think this applies to you, then your doctor will need to fill in a DVLA medical information questionnaire (PDF, 265kb). You're only legally allowed to drive if you can read a number plate from a distance of 20 metres (65 feet), and an eye test shows your visual acuity is at least 6\/12. You're allowed to wear glasses or contact lenses when reading the plate or letter chart. There are also standards relating to your visual field and driving. If you have a condition that may reduce your visual field, the DVLA may ask you to complete a visual field test to demonstrate you're safe to drive. Employment If you're currently employed and have recently been diagnosed with a visual impairment, you should contact the Access to Work scheme. Access to Work is a scheme run by Jobcentre Plus that provides advice and support about what equipment and adjustments may be required to enable you to do your job. They also offer a grant to contribute towards the costs of any equipment or training you may need, such as voice recognition software, a Braille keyboard and display unit and a printer that can convert text into Braille (Braille embossers). Depending on the size of the company you work for, the grant can pay for 80-100% of costs, up to £10,000. If you're currently looking for work, there are three main organisations that can provide extra advice and support: The RNIB, which has a useful section on its website about looking for work Jobcentre Plus  Action for Blind People  You don't have to disclose that you have a visual impairment when applying for a job, but it's usually recommended that you do. If you feel you've been turned down for a job because of your disability, and you were capable of doing the job, you can make a complaint under the Equality Act 2010. Some people with a visual impairment decide to become self-employed, often because it allows them the flexibility to work at home for hours they choose. Action for Blind People has self-employment advisers who can provide information and training on issues such as drawing up a business plan, obtaining funding and book-keeping. The RNIB website has more information and advice about work and employment. You can also read more about employment on the Action for Blind People website. Regular sight tests If you have vision loss, it's still important to have regular sight tests so your optometrist (eye specialist) can check for further changes in your eyes and give you advice about how to make the best use of your vision. Find an optician near you and read more about NHS eye care services. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 238 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Eye tests for adults Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, learn about the importance of eye tests and how to detect symptoms that could lead to problems with your eyesight. Media last reviewed: 18\/06\/2015 Next review due: 18\/06\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Cataracts Diabetic retinopathy Eye health Find an optician Glaucoma Living with low vision Macular degeneration External links Action for Blind People Eyecare Trust: eye information Guide Dogs: services GOV.UK: driving with a health condition RLSB: early years RNIB: living with sight loss Deafblind UK Look after your eyes Why regular eye tests are important and how a healthy lifestyle can help you maintain good vision Eye health tips for over-60s How to keep your eyes healthy as you get older, with regular eye tests, prescription lenses and self-help measures Living with low vision Nearly 2 million people in the UK are affected by low vision. But with the right help, your eyesight can be maximised Find and choose services for Visual impairment Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lou Gehrig's disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Motor-neurone-disease","content":"Motor neurone disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Motor neurone disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Motor-neurone-disease Clinical trials Motor neurone disease Motor-neurone-disease Symptoms Motor-neurone-disease Causes Motor-neurone-disease Diagnosis Motor-neurone-disease Treatment Introduction  Motor neurone disease is a rare condition that progressively damages parts of the nervous system. This leads to muscle weakness, often with visible wasting. Motor neurone disease, also known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), occurs when specialist nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord called motor neurones stop working properly. This is known as neurodegeneration. Motor neurones control important muscle activity, such as: gripping walking speaking swallowing breathing As the condition progresses, people with motor neurone disease will find some or all of these activities increasingly difficult. Eventually, they may become impossible. It's not clear what causes motor neurones to stop working properly. In about 5% of cases there's a family history of either motor neurone disease or a related condition called frontotemporal dementia. This is known as familial motor neurone disease. In most of these cases, faulty genes have been identified as making a major contribution to the development of the condition. There's no single test to diagnose motor neurone disease and diagnosis is based mainly on the opinion of a brain and nervous system specialist (a neurologist). The diagnosis of motor neurone disease is usually clear to an experienced neurologist, but sometimes specialised tests are needed to rule out other conditions with similar features. Read more about the causes of motor neurone disease and diagnosing motor neurone disease. Progression of symptoms The symptoms of motor neurone disease begin gradually over weeks and months, usually on one side of the body initially, and get progressively worse. Common early symptoms include: a weakened grip, which can cause difficulty picking up or holding objects weakness at the shoulder that makes lifting the arm difficult a \"foot drop\" caused by weak ankle muscles dragging of the leg slurred speech (dysarthria) The condition isn't usually painful. As damage progresses, symptoms spread to other parts of the body and the condition becomes more debilitating. Eventually, a person with motor neurone disease may be unable to move. Communicating, swallowing and breathing may also become very difficult. In up to 15% of cases, motor neurone disease is associated with a type of dementia that can affect personality and behaviour. This is called frontotemporal dementia, and is often an early feature when it occurs in motor neurone disease. The affected person may not realise that their personality or behaviour is different. Who's affected by motor neurone disease? Motor neurone disease is a rare condition that affects around two in every 100,000 people in the UK each year. There are about 5,000 people living with the condition in the UK at any one time. The condition can affect adults of all ages, including teenagers, although this is extremely rare. It's usually diagnosed in people over 40, but most people with the condition first develop symptoms in their 60s. It affects slightly more men than women. Treating motor neurone disease There's currently no cure for motor neurone disease. Treatment aims to: make the person feel comfortable and have the best quality of life possible compensate for the progressive loss of bodily functions such as mobility, communication, swallowing and breathing For example, a breathing mask can greatly help the symptoms of breathing and weakness, and a feeding tube (called a gastrostomy) helps maintain nutrition and overall comfort. If necessary, medication can be used to help control excessive drooling. A medication called riluzole has shown a very small improvement in patients' overall survival, but it isn't a cure and doesn't stop the condition progressing. Read more about treating motor neurone disease. Survival rates Motor neurone disease is a severely life-shortening condition for most people. Life expectancy for about half of those with the condition is three years from the start of symptoms. However, some people may live for up to 10 years, and in rarer circumstances even longer. Living with motor neurone disease is extremely challenging and often a terrifying possibility before the diagnosis is made. However, it's not necessarily as bleak as people imagine. With strong community and specialist support, many people can maintain some independence for a significant part of the condition's course, and experience a quality of life they may not have imagined was possible at the time of their diagnosis. The end of life for someone with motor neurone disease isn't usually distressing and is most often in their own home. In most cases, a person with the condition will die in their sleep as the end stage of gradual weakness in their breathing muscles. Although some people with the condition will have swallowing problems, they won't choke to death. Advice and support The Motor Neurone Disease Association (MNDA) is the leading UK charity for people affected by the condition. The MNDA can give you information, practical advice and support about living with motor neurone disease and coping with the emotional impact of being diagnosed. The MNDA also run a network of specialist hospital clinics across the UK, where a neurologist who's an expert in motor neurone disease can provide you with further information and advice. Information about you If you have motor neurone disease, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Motor neurone disease Julie's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Julie has motor neurone disease. Find out how she copes with this incurable condition, and how she finds the strength to continue working as a primary school teacher. Sadly, since the making of this film, Julie Genovese has died. Media last reviewed: 29\/05\/2015 Next review due: 29\/05\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 07\/01\/2015 Next review due: 07\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 980 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 576  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 221  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Disability and social care Dysphagia End of life care guide Frontotemporal dementia Practical guide to caring Work and disability External links Brain & Spine Foundation MND Association Motor neurone disease: Kevan's story Kevan Hassall, 42, describes his life with motor neurone disease and shares his tips for coping NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Low blood pressure","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Blood-pressure-(low)","content":"Low blood pressure (hypotension) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Low blood pressure (hypotension)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Blood-pressure-(low) Clinical trials Low blood pressure (hypotension) Blood-pressure-(low) Symptoms Blood-pressure-(low) Causes Blood-pressure-(low) Diagnosis Blood-pressure-(low) Treatment Introduction  Low blood pressure, also known as hypotension, is where blood pressure in your arteries is abnormally low. Naturally low blood pressure is unlikely to cause any symptoms and is normally nothing to worry about. But if your blood pressure drops too low, it can restrict the amount of blood flowing to your brain and other vital organs, which can cause unsteadiness, dizziness or fainting. See your GP if you experience any symptoms of low blood pressure and are concerned. All adults should have their blood pressure checked at least every five years. If you haven't had yours measured or don't know what your reading is, ask your GP to check it. Read more about the symptoms of low blood pressure. What is low blood pressure? The heart pumps a constant supply of blood around the body through arteries, veins and capillaries. Blood pressure is a measure of the force of the blood on the walls of the arteries as the blood flows through them. It's measured in millimetres of mercury (mmHg) and recorded as two measurements: systolic pressure \u2013 the pressure when your heart beats and squeezes blood into your arteries diastolic pressure \u2013 the pressure when your heart rests between beats  For example, if your systolic blood pressure is 120mmHg and your diastolic blood pressure is 80mmHg, your blood pressure is 120 over 80, which is commonly written as 120\/80. Normal blood pressure is between 90\/60 and 140\/90. If you have a reading of 140\/90 or more, you have high blood pressure (hypertension). This puts you at greater risk of developing serious health conditions, such as heart attack or stroke. People with a blood pressure reading under 90\/60 are usually regarded as having low blood pressure. Read more about diagnosing low blood pressure. Why do I have low blood pressure? You can have low blood pressure for many reasons, including the time of day, your age, the temperature, any medication you may be on, an injury, and some illnesses. Read more about the causes of low blood pressure. Treatment and self-help Naturally low blood pressure doesn't usually need to be treated unless it's causing symptoms such as dizziness or recurrent falls. If it's causing symptoms, your GP will look at what the cause might be in case it can be treated. There are also various things you can do to help limit symptoms of low blood pressure, including: standing up gradually and avoiding standing for long periods of time ensuring you are well hydrated wearing support stockings adding more salt to your diet eating smaller meals more often Read more about treating low blood pressure. Page last reviewed: 22\/05\/2015 Next review due: 22\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1164 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 525  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 346  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 142  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Fainting Dehydration High blood pressure External links Blood Pressure UK Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Is your blood pressure too high? At least 25% of adults have high blood pressure. Get tips on how to keep healthy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Low dose aspirin","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Anti-platelets-aspirin-low-dose-","content":"Aspirin - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Aspirin  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anti-platelets-aspirin-low-dose- Clinical trials Anti-platelets-aspirin-low-dose- Community Aspirin   Aspirin is a common medicine that has a number of uses, from relieving pain to reducing the risk of serious problems such as heart attacks and strokes. It comes in many forms, including pills, tablets that are dissolved in water, powders and oral gels. Some types can be bought over the counter from pharmacies, while others are only available on prescription. This page covers: Uses for aspirin Who can and can't take aspirin How to take aspirin Side effects of aspirin Interactions with other medicines, food and alcohol Missed or extra doses Uses for aspirin At high doses \u2013 usually 300mg \u2013 aspirin can relieve pain, reduce a high temperature (fever) and reduce swelling. It's often used for short-term relief from: headaches and migraines toothache period pains general aches and pains colds and flu Long-term treatment with low doses of aspirin \u2013 usually 75mg \u2013 has an antiplatelet effect, which means it makes the blood less sticky and can stop blood clots developing. A doctor may recommend this if you have or have had: a heart attack or angina a stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA) peripheral arterial disease (PAD) coronary artery bypass surgery or another operation on your heart or blood vessels Aspirin may also be prescribed for children after heart surgery or to treat Kawasaki disease. But it shouldn't be given to anyone under 16 years old without medical supervision. Who can and can't take aspirin Most people can take aspirin safely. But you should get advice from a pharmacist or doctor before taking it if you: have had an allergic reaction to aspirin or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, in the past have asthma have had stomach ulcers in the past have severe liver or kidney problems have haemophilia or another bleeding disorder have uncontrolled high blood pressure are looking for medication for a child under 16 \u2013 medication containing aspirin shouldn't be given to children under 16 are over 65 years of age are pregnant, breastfeeding or trying to get pregnant are taking other medications \u2013 see Interactions with other medicines, below You may still be able to take aspirin in these cases, but you should only do so if advised that it's safe by a healthcare professional. If you can't take aspirin, a different medicine, such as paracetamol (for pain) or clopidogrel (to prevent blood clots), may be recommended instead. How to take aspirin Your pharmacist or doctor can tell you how often to take your aspirin and how much you should take. You can also check the recommendations in the leaflet that comes with your medicine. Generally speaking: high-dose aspirin (to relive pain) can be taken three or four times a day, with at least four hours between each dose, until your symptoms improve low-dose aspirin (to prevent blood clots) is taken once a day, usually for the rest of your life Some medicine leaflets advise taking aspirin with water, while others may recommend taking it before or after food.  Follow the instructions in the leaflet or label that comes with your medicine. Ask your pharmacist if you're not sure. Side effects of aspirin Like all medications, there's a risk of side effects from aspirin. The most common side effects are:  indigestion and stomach aches \u2013 taking your medicine with food may help reduce this risk bleeding or bruising more easily than normal Uncommon and rare side effects include: hives \u2013 a raised, itchy rash tinnitus \u2013 hearing sounds that come from inside your body breathing difficulties or an asthma attack an allergic reaction \u2013 this can cause breathing problems, swelling of the mouth, lips or throat, and a sudden rash bleeding in the stomach \u2013 this can cause dark, tar-like stools or vomiting blood bleeding in the brain \u2013 this can cause a sudden, severe headache, vision problems and stroke symptoms, such as slurred speech and weakness on one side of the body Speak to your doctor if you experience any concerning or troublesome side effects while taking aspirin. Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if you think you're having a severe allergic reaction, or you have symptoms of bleeding in your stomach or brain. Interactions with other medicines, food and alcohol Aspirin can potentially interact with other medications, including some complementary and herbal medicines, which could alter their effects or increase your risk of side effects. Medicines that can interact with aspirin include: NSAIDs \u2013 such as ibuprofen or naproxen steroid medication \u2013 such as prednisolone anticoagulant medicines \u2013 such as warfarin or heparin SSRI antidepressants \u2013 such as citalopram, fluoxetine or paroxetine some medications used to treat high blood pressure \u2013 such as ACE inhibitors or diuretics some medicines used to treat epilepsy \u2013 such as phenytoin other medicines containing aspirin \u2013 including cold and flu remedies where aspirin is one of the ingredients This is not a complete list. If you want to check whether a medicine is safe to take with aspirin, ask your doctor or pharmacist, or read the leaflet that comes with the medicine. There are no known interactions between aspirin and food. The risk of bleeding in the stomach may be higher if you drink alcohol while taking aspirin, so you may want to consider reducing how much you drink or avoiding alcohol completely. Missed or extra doses If you're taking aspirin to reduce your risk of blood clots and you forget to take a dose, take that dose as soon as you remember and then continue to take your course of aspirin as normal. If it's almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular schedule. Don't take a double dose to make up for a missed one. If you think you've taken too much aspirin (overdose) and have any concerns, speak to your GP or pharmacist, or call NHS 111. Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest A&E department if you experience problems such as rapid breathing, vomiting, tinnitus, sweating, or dizziness after an overdose. Page last reviewed: 06\/05\/2016 Next review due: 06\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 321 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Healthy hearts Heart attack Stroke Should I stop taking antiplatelets before minor surgery? External links Arthritis Research UK: aspirin British Heart Foundation: aspirin Yellow Card Scheme: report a side effect How your pharmacy can help Your local pharmacy is more than just a shop for medicines \u2013 it could save a trip to the GP Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Low mood","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/stress-anxiety-depression\/Pages\/low-mood-and-depression.aspx","content":"Low mood and depression - Stress, anxiety and depression - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stress, anxiety and depression Common problems I feel really down   I'm so stressed   I feel anxious and panicky   I feel angry often   I think I have the winter blues I'm worried someone is depressed   I'm worried my child might be depressed I think I'm having panic attacks Mood self-assessment What you can do now Low mood and depression How to feel happier Beating the winter blues Tips for coping with depression Exercise for depression Fear and phobias Anxiety in children Dealing with panic attacks Coping with fear Ten ways to fight your fears Getting help with phobias Stress Breathing exercise for stress Ten stress busters Beat stress at work Easy time-management tips Coping with exam stress Coping with money worries Anger management How to control your anger Expert tips on child anger Therapy and counselling Different types of therapy Benefits of talking therapy Find the right therapist Mental health helplines Self-help therapies Can I get free therapy or counselling? Depression support groups Five steps to wellbeing Learn about the five steps Mindfulness for mental wellbeing Connect for mental wellbeing Get active for mental wellbeing Give for mental wellbeing Learn for mental wellbeing Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel Learn Life Skills: LLTTF Moodzone mental wellbeing audio guides Real stories 'I beat agoraphobia' Read how Claire overcame agoraphobia with the help of group therapy 'I run to boost my mood' Running two or three times a week helps protect Liz from depression 'I used to hit my husband' An anger management course helped Florence end her violent behaviour towards her husband 'How I've learnt to deal with stress' Stress-reduction workshops taught Arvind how to control his stress levels 'I burned out from work stress' When Liz's doctor told her she had burned out from stress, she initially found it hard to believe Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel Mental wellbeing audio guides Panic attacks Podcast with expert advice on how to tackle panic attacks. Anxiety and worry Podcast offering expert advice about worry and anxiety. Anxiety control Podcast explaining how you can take control of your anxiety. Unhelpful thinking Podcast to help you replace negativity with positive thinking. Depression Podcast on how to cope with low mood and depression. Low confidence Podcast providing tips to help you build your confidence. Sleep problems Podcast with expert tips on how to get a good night's sleep. Problem solving Podcast to help you make problems more manageable. Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel   Listen to all the Moodzone audio guides You are here: Health A-Z Stress, anxiety and depression Share: Save: Print: Low mood and depression Difficult events and experiences can leave us in low spirits or cause depression. It could be relationship problems, bereavement, sleep problems, stress at work, bullying, chronic illness or pain. Sometimes it's possible to feel down without there being an obvious reason. What's the difference between low mood and depression? A general low mood can include: sadness feeling anxious or panicky worry tiredness low self-esteem frustration anger However, a low mood will tend to lift after a few days or weeks. Making some small changes in your life, such as resolving a difficult situation, talking about your problems or getting more sleep, can usually improve your mood. A low mood that doesn't go away can be a sign of depression. Symptoms of depression can include the following: low mood lasting two weeks or more not getting any enjoyment out of life feeling hopeless feeling tired or lacking energy not being able to concentrate on everyday things like reading the paper or watching television comfort eating or losing your appetite sleeping more than usual or being unable to sleep having suicidal thoughts or thoughts about harming yourself Read more about the symptoms of depression. Depression can also come on at specific points in your life, such as the winter months (seasonal affective disorder, or SAD) and after the birth of a child (postnatal depression). When to get help for low mood or depression Whatever the cause, if negative feelings don't go away, are too much for you to cope with, or are stopping you from carrying on with your normal life, you may need to make some changes and get some extra support. If you're still feeling down after a couple of weeks, talk to your GP or call NHS 111. Your GP can discuss your symptoms with you and make a diagnosis. What types of help are available? If you are diagnosed with depression, your GP will discuss all of the available treatment options with you, including self-help, talking therapies and antidepressants. Self-help Whether you have depression or just find yourself feeling down for a while, it could be worth trying some self-help techniques. Life changes, such as getting a regular good night's sleep, keeping to a healthy diet, reducing your alcohol intake and getting regular exercise, can help you feel more in control and more able to cope. Self-help techniques can include activities such as meditation, breathing exercises and learning ways to think about problems differently. Tools such as self-help books and online counselling can be very effective. If your GP has prescribed antidepressants, it's important that you carry on taking them. Read more about self-help therapies. Talking therapies There are lots of different types of talking therapies available. To help you decide which one would most suit you, talk to your GP or read about the different types of talking therapies. In some areas, you can refer yourself directly to your local psychological therapies service.  Antidepressants Antidepressants are commonly used to treat depression. There are several types available. If your GP prescribes you antidepressants, they will discuss the different types and which one would suit you best. Learn more about antidepressants. When to seek help immediately If you start to feel like your life isn't worth living, or that you want to harm yourself, get help straight away. Either see your GP or call NHS 111. You can also call Samaritans on 116 123 for 24-hour confidential, non-judgemental emotional support. See some other organisations that can help with mental health issues. Moodzone: Low mood and depression Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Dr Chris Williams explains what you can do to help yourself cope with low mood and depression. This podcast is one of an eight-part series for Moodzone. Media last reviewed: 02\/03\/2015 Next review due: 02\/03\/2017 Page last reviewed: 04\/01\/2016 Next review due: 04\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 528 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 248  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 130  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 74  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Help and support for young people Mental health hub for young people with advice on depression, anxiety, self-harm, stress, bullying and eating disorders Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_44\/accessible.html Do you feel you can't go on? If you are feeling overwhelmed and unable to cope, here are the people who can help Related articles  Bullying at work Feeling depressed after having a baby Menopause: self-help tips Living with pain External links Action for Happiness  Big White Wall CALM: Campaign Against Living Miserably HeadMeds: mental health medication Services near you Find emotional support services in your area Find and compare services Services Anxiety Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Depression Depression self-help groups Mental health information and support Mental health support for young people Psychological therapies (IAPT) Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Low sperm count","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/low-sperm-count","content":"Low sperm count - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Low sperm count  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Low sperm count   A low sperm count, also called oligozoospermia, is where a man has fewer than 15 million sperm per millilitre of semen. Having a low sperm count can make it more difficult to conceive naturally, although successful pregnancies can still occur. Problems with sperm, including a low sperm count and problems with sperm quality, are quite common. They're a factor in around one in three couples who are struggling to get pregnant. There are treatments available on the NHS or privately that can help you become a dad if you have a low sperm count. This page covers: Getting tested Home-testing kits Causes Treatments Getting your sperm count checked See your GP if you have not managed to conceive after one year of trying for a baby. It's a good idea for both you and your partner to get advice, as fertility problems can affect men and women and often it's a combination of both. It's important to understand what the exact issue is before you decide on your next steps. One of the tests your GP can arrange is a semen analysis. This is where a sample of your semen is analysed in a laboratory to check the quality and quantity of the sperm. The results are usually available within a week. If the results are abnormal, the test should be repeated to ensure it was accurate. This will normally be performed after three months. Your GP can refer you to a specialist in male infertility at your local hospital or fertility clinic if any problems are found. Home sperm count testing kits There are several male fertility home-testing kits available to buy from pharmacies. These tests claim to indicate whether your sperm count is low. It may be tempting to try one of the tests if you would rather not see your GP, but you should be aware that: although research by the manufacturers suggests these tests can give an accurate indication of sperm count, they haven't been extensively studied some home-testing kits classify a low sperm count as under 20 million sperm per millilitre of semen, but more recent international guidelines state that anything above 15 million sperm per millilitre of semen is normal home-testing kits only check the number of sperm, not other things that can affect fertility, such as how well the sperm are able to move (motility) While these tests might sometimes give a useful indication of your sperm count, they may also give you false reassurance or may suggest your sperm count is low when it's actually perfectly normal. It's better to see your GP for a proper semen analysis at an accredited laboratory if you're concerned about your fertility. See how to use self-test kits safely for more about the issues of home-testing. Causes of a low sperm count In many cases, it's not obvious what causes a low sperm count. Sometimes problems with sperm count and quality are associated with: a hormone imbalance, such as hypogonadism (reduced hormone production) a genetic problem such as Klinefelter syndrome having had undescended testicles as a baby a structural problem \u2013 for example, the tubes that carry sperm being damaged and blocked by illness or injury, or being absent from birth a genital infection such as chlamydia, gonorrhoea or prostatitis (infection of the prostate gland) varicoceles (enlarged veins in the testicles) previous surgery to the testicles or hernia repairs  the testicles becoming overheated excessive alcohol consumption, smoking and using drugs such as marijuana or cocaine certain medications, including testosterone replacement therapy, long-term anabolic steroid use, cancer medications (chemotherapy), some antibiotics and some antidepressants Treatments for low sperm count If you or your partner has been diagnosed with a low sperm count, there are several options available. Keep trying Your doctor may initially suggest trying to conceive naturally for a little longer. Many couples conceive within the second year of trying. You can help maximise your chances of conceiving by: having sex every two or three days moderating your alcohol consumption and stopping smoking staying in good shape, exercising regularly and having a healthy, balanced diet Read more about how to improve your chances of becoming a dad. IVF In vitro fertilisation (IVF) may be an option if you have a slightly low sperm count and you've been trying to conceive naturally with your partner for at least two years. During IVF, an egg is removed from the woman's ovaries and fertilised with sperm in a laboratory. The fertilised egg is then returned to the woman's womb to grow and develop. Read more about IVF. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) is a type of IVF technique, in which a single sperm is injected directly into an egg to fertilise it. The fertilised egg is then transferred to the woman's womb. ICSI may be offered if you've been trying to conceive naturally with your partner for at least two years and you have either: few or no sperm in your semen poor quality sperm Before having ICSI, you and your partner will need to have an assessment to ensure the treatment is appropriate. This will involve questions about your medical and sexual history, and screening tests to check for infections or genetic problems that could affect your baby and the chances of ICSI working. The Human Fertilisation & Embryo Authority (HFEA) has more information about ICSI. Donor insemination Donor insemination means using sperm donated by another man. You may wish to consider using donor insemination as an alternative to ICSI, particularly if the man has a genetic disorder that could be passed on to any children. It can be used as part of IVF if necessary. If you're considering donor insemination, you should be offered counselling as a couple about the implications for you and your children. Read more about what you need to know about using a sperm donor. Gonadotrophin medication If you have very low levels of gonadotrophin hormones (which stimulate the production of sperm), you should be offered treatment with gonadotrophin medication to improve your fertility. But if no cause has been found for your abnormal sperm count, you will not be offered hormone-based medicines as they are not known to improve fertility in these cases. Page last reviewed: 02\/08\/2016 Next review due: 02\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 107 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Fertility advice IVF Using a sperm donor: what you need to know Infertility External links Infertility Network UK Support if you have fertility problems Fertility problems can leave you emotionally drained. Find out how to get support Is IVF right for you? Considering IVF? Find out if IVF gives you the best chance of getting pregnant, and how to get IVF on the NHS NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lumbago (low back pain)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/back-pain","content":"Back pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Back pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Back-pain Real stories Back-pain Clinical trials Back-pain Community Back pain Back-pain Causes Back-pain Diagnosis Back-pain Treatment Back-pain Prevention Introduction  Back pain is a common problem that affects most people at some point in their life. It may be triggered by bad posture while sitting or standing, bending awkwardly, or lifting incorrectly. It's not generally caused by a serious condition. Find out more about the causes of back pain. In most cases back pain will improve in a few weeks or months, although some people experience long-term pain or pain that keeps coming back. Types of back pain Backache is most common in the lower back (lumbago), although it can be felt anywhere along your spine, from your neck down to your hips. Read information on neck pain and shoulder pain, which are covered separately. Sometimes back pain can be caused by an injury or disease, such as: a slipped disc \u2013 when one of the discs in the spine is damaged and presses on the nerves sciatica \u2013 irritation or compression of the sciatic nerve, which causes pain, numbness and tingling that travels down one leg whiplash \u2013 neck injury caused by a sudden impact frozen shoulder \u2013 inflammation around the shoulder that causes pain and stiffness ankylosing spondylitis \u2013 a long-term condition that causes pain and stiffness where the spine meets the pelvis The rest of this information will focus on back pain that doesn't have an obvious cause. Doctors call this non-specific back pain. What to do Most cases of back pain get better on their own and you may not need to see a doctor. If you've only had back pain for a few days or weeks, the following advice may help relieve your symptoms and speed up your recovery: remain as active as possible and try to continue with your daily activities take over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen if you feel you need to use hot or cold compression packs \u2013 you can buy these from your local pharmacy, or a bag of frozen vegetables and a hot water bottle will work just as well Although it can be difficult to be cheerful or optimistic if you are in pain, it's important to stay positive as this can help you recover faster. Read more about treatments for short-term back pain. Treatments for long-term back pain If you're worried about your back or your pain hasn't improved by around six weeks, it's a good idea to visit your GP, who can advise you about the treatments available. These include: stronger painkillers exercise classes \u2013 where you are taught specific exercises to strengthen your muscles and improve your posture manual therapy \u2013 such as physiotherapy, chiropractic or osteopathy acupuncture counselling \u2013 such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) support and advice at a specialist pain clinic Some people choose to see a therapist for manual therapy or acupuncture without seeing their GP first. If you want to do this, you will usually need to pay for private treatment, which is likely to cost around £30-50 for each appointment. Spinal surgery is usually only recommended when all else has failed. Read more about treating long-term back pain. Preventing back pain How you sit, stand, lie and lift can all affect the health of your back. Try to avoid placing too much pressure on your back and ensure it's strong and supple. Regular exercise, such as walking and swimming, is an excellent way of preventing back pain. Activities such as yoga or pilates can improve your flexibility and strengthen your back muscles. See the back pain guide for advice about how to sit, stand and lift correctly to avoid backache, or read more about preventing back pain. Signs of a serious problem You should seek urgent medical help if you have back pain and: a high temperature (fever) unexplained weight loss a swelling or a deformity in your back it's constant and doesn't ease after lying down pain in your chest loss of bladder or bowel control an inability to pass urine numbness around your genitals, buttocks or back passage it's worse at night it started after an accident, such as after a car accident These problems could be a sign of something more serious and need to be assessed as soon as possible. Read more about how back pain is diagnosed. Page last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1516 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 411  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 368  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 208  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 365  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain guide Back pain advice Backache in pregnancy Living with pain Sciatica External links Arthritis Research UK: back pain BackCare: back pain British Pain Society: FAQs Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: back pain NICE: low back pain Pain Concern The Pain Toolkit Back pain guide Explore this guide for information about different types of back pain and how you can prevent it, plus advice on treatment Exercise is 'most effective' method of preventing lower back pain A 2016 review of available evidence concluded that exercise was the most likely intervention to prevent lower back pain Exercises for back pain Exercises for back pain, including advice on staying active, creating an exercise programme and how manual therapy can help Backache in pregnancy Causes of backache in pregnancy, and what you can do to prevent and ease back pain Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Back pain Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lumbar decompression surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lumbardecompressivesurgery","content":"Lumbar decompression surgery - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lumbar decompression surgery  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lumbardecompressivesurgery Real stories Lumbardecompressivesurgery Clinical trials Lumbar decompression surgery Lumbardecompressivesurgery When it's used Lumbardecompressivesurgery How it's performed Lumbardecompressivesurgery Recovery Lumbardecompressivesurgery Risks Introduction  Lumbar decompression surgery is a type of surgery used to treat compressed nerves in the lower (lumbar) spine. It's only recommended when non-surgical treatments haven't helped.  The surgery aims to improve symptoms such as persistent pain and numbness in the legs caused by pressure on the nerves in the spine. Lumbar decompression surgery is often used to treat: spinal stenosis \u2013 narrowing of a section of the spinal column, which puts pressure on the nerves inside a slipped disc and sciatica \u2013 where a damaged spinal disc presses down on an underlying nerve spinal injuries \u2013 such as a fracture or the swelling of tissue metastatic spinal cord compression \u2013 where cancer in one part of the body, such as the lungs, spreads into the spine and presses on the spinal cord or nerves Read more about when lumbar spinal surgery is used. What happens during lumbar decompression surgery If lumbar decompression surgery is recommended, you'll usually have at least one of the following procedures: laminectomy \u2013 where a section of bone is removed from one of your vertebrae (spinal bones) to relieve pressure on the affected nerve discectomy \u2013 where a section of a damaged disc is removed to relieve pressure on a nerve spinal fusion \u2013 where two or more vertebrae are joined together with a section of bone to stabilise and strengthen the spine In many cases, a combination of these techniques may be used. Lumbar decompression is usually carried out under general anaesthetic, which means you'll be unconscious during the procedure and won't feel any pain as it's carried out. The whole operation usually takes at least an hour, but may take much longer, depending on the complexity of the procedure. Read more about how lumbar decompression surgery is performed. Recovering from lumbar decompression surgery You'll usually be well enough to leave hospital about one to four days after having surgery, depending on the complexity of the surgery and your level of mobility before the operation. Most people are able to walk unassisted within a day of having the operation, although more strenuous activities will need to be avoided for about six weeks. You may be able to return to work after about four to six weeks, although you may need more time off if your job involves driving for long periods or lifting heavy objects. Read more about recovering from lumbar decompression surgery. Effectiveness of lumbar decompression surgery There's good evidence that decompression surgery can be an effective treatment for people with severe pain caused by compressed nerves.  Up to three in every four people who have the operation experience a significant improvement in pain. People who found walking difficult before surgery because of leg pain or weakness are often able to walk further and more easily after the operation. Risks of lumbar decompression surgery Although lumbar decompression is often successful, like all types of surgery it carries a risk of complications. Complications associated with lumbar decompression surgery include: infection at the site of the operation, or in rare cases an infection elsewhere a blood clot developing in one of your leg veins, known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT); in rare cases, the clot can dislodge and travel to the lungs, causing a serious problem called a pulmonary embolism damage to the spinal nerves or cord \u2013 resulting in continuing symptoms, numbness or weakness in one or both legs, or in rare cases some degree of paralysis  Read more about the complications of lumbar decompression surgery. The spine and spinal cord The spine is made up of 24 individual bones, called vertebrae, which are stacked on top of each other to form the spinal column. In between each vertebra are protective, circular pads of tissue called discs, which cushion the vertebrae during activities such as walking and running. The spinal canal runs through the centre of the spinal column. It contains and protects the spinal cord and nerves. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 11\/08\/2015 Next review due: 11\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 484 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 263  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 129  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Lumbar surgery Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Around half of us have back pain at some time in our lives. It often heals in time, but for some people the pain doesn't go away and surgery is the only answer. Watch this video to see how lumbar surgery can relieve pressure on the spinal nerves in the lower back. Media last reviewed: 19\/01\/2016 Next review due: 19\/01\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Having an operation Sciatica Slipped disc External links British Association of Spine Surgeons (BASS) British Pain Society NICE: low back pain Pain Concern Spinal Research Back pain guide Explore this guide for information about different types of back pain and how you can prevent it, plus advice on treatment Sciatica Sciatica is a condition that can cause pain, tingling and numbness that radiates from your lower back and travels down your leg to your foot Find and choose services for lumbar surgery Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lumbar puncture","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lumbar-puncture","content":"Lumbar puncture - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lumbar puncture  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lumbar-puncture Clinical trials Lumbar-puncture Lumbar puncture Lumbar-puncture Why it is used Lumbar-puncture How it is performed Lumbar-puncture Side effects Introduction  A lumbar puncture is a medical procedure where a needle is inserted into the lower part of the spine to test for conditions affecting the brain, spinal cord or other parts of the nervous system.  During the procedure, pressure is measured and samples of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are taken from inside the spine. CSF is a clear, colourless fluid that surrounds and supports the brain and spinal cord. Analysis of CFS can often reveal a good deal about some conditions that affect the brain and spinal cord. The fluid can be tested to help diagnose conditions, such as: meningitis \u2013 an infection of the layers (membranes) surrounding the brain and spinal cord subarachnoid haemorrhage \u2013 a type of stroke, caused by bleeding in and around the brain Guillain-Barré syndrome \u2013 a rare condition that causes inflammation of the nerves in the arms and legs A lumbar puncture doesn't necessarily mean you have one of these conditions; it may be used to rule them out. A lumbar puncture can also be used to treat some conditions, such as injecting antibiotics or chemotherapy medication into the CSF. Read more about why lumbar punctures are used. How is a lumbar puncture carried out? Under local anaesthetic, a hollow needle is inserted into the base of the spine and into the spinal canal, which contains the spinal cord and the nerves coming from it. The pressure within the spinal canal is usually measured and some CSF is removed either to reduce the pressure or for a sample to be sent for testing. You will normally be lying on your side, with your legs pulled up and your chin tucked in, but sometimes the procedure is carried out while you\u2019re seated and leaning forwards. It usually takes around 30-45 minutes to complete. It\u2019s possible to get results on CSF samples within 48 hours, but specialised tests can take several weeks. Read more about how a lumbar puncture is performed. Are there any risks? A lumbar puncture is generally safe and the risk of serious complications is very low. Serious side effects are generally uncommon, although many people experience headaches caused by CSF leaking out through the needle hole in the spine. This occurs internally, so you won\u2019t see it. The headaches are typically worse when in the upright position and can usually be relieved by lying down. Drinking plenty of fluids and taking simple painkillers will also help. It can take up to a week for the hole to heal and the fluid to stop leaking. Read more about the possible side effects of a lumbar puncture. Lumbar puncture During a lumbar puncture, you may be asked to lie on your side so a needle can be inserted between the two bones at the base of your spine. Page last reviewed: 04\/02\/2015 Next review due: 04\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 346 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 197  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Guillain-Barré syndrome Meningitis Subarachnoid haemorrhage External links Great Ormond Street: lumbar puncture KidsHealth: lumbar puncture GP referrals Find out how to get a GP referral, including tips on other services you may access through your GP Hospital admissions Find out what happens when you are admitted to hospital, including what forms to fill in or tests to undergo NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lump or swelling","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/lumps-swellings","content":"Lumps and swellings - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lumps and swellings  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lumps and swellings Introduction  Most lumps and swellings under the skin are harmless and can be left alone. However, see your GP if you develop a new lump or swelling so that the cause can be identified. A painful lump or swelling that appears suddenly over a day or two may be caused by an injury or infection. It's likely to be an infection if the skin around the lump is red and warm. Your GP can advise you about how to care for this. Below are some of the most common reasons for an unexplained lump or swelling under the skin in the following areas of the body: face  neck or throat  breast  groin area   testicle    anus (bottom)  hand, wrist or finger  shoulders, back, chest or arm  armpit  This information should give you an idea about what your lump or swelling might be. However, don't use it to diagnose yourself with a condition. Always leave that to your doctor.  Facial swelling or lump A lump or swelling on the face that wasn't caused by an injury is most likely to be one of the following: mumps \u2013 a viral infection that usually affects children and causes swelling of the glands on the side of the face an allergic reaction \u2013 for example to peanuts, which causes swelling in the deeper layers of the skin (angioedema)  a dental abscess \u2013 that causes the side of the mouth to swell a salivary gland stone \u2013 this forms when the chemicals in saliva crystallise and block the flow of saliva from a salivary gland near the jaw, causing pain and swelling around the jaw Click on the links above for more information about these conditions.  Lump in the neck or throat A lump in the neck or throat is most likely to be one of the following: swollen glands \u2013 usually a sign of infection, such as a cold or glandular fever; the glands tend to go down when you recover a cyst \u2013 a harmless fluid-filled lump that may disappear on its own without treatment (it will feel like a pea and roll under the skin when you press it) a skin tag \u2013 a harmless, knobbly wart-like growth that hangs off the skin and can be left alone a goitre \u2013 an abnormal swelling of the thyroid gland in the neck that causes a lump to form in the throat   Click on the links above for more information about these conditions. Lump in the breast Breast lumps are common and have several different causes. While most breast lumps aren't breast cancer, any unusual changes to the breasts should be checked by a GP as soon as possible. Common causes of breast lumps include: mastitis \u2013 painful, swollen breast tissue that is sometimes caused by an infection  enlarged milk ducts a non-cancerous growth (fibroadenoma) a cyst \u2013 a harmless fluid-filled lump a lipoma \u2013 a harmless fatty lump  a skin tag \u2013 a harmless, wart-like growth often found underneath the breast Read more about breast lumps.  Lump around the groin area Common causes of a lump or lumps in the groin area include: a cyst \u2013 a harmless fluid-filled lump swollen glands \u2013 usually a sign of infection, such as a cold or glandular fever; the glands tend to go down when you recover a hernia \u2013 where an internal part of the body, such as part of the bowel, pushes through a weakness in the muscle or surrounding tissue wall an enlarged vein \u2013 known as a saphena varix, which is caused by a faulty valve inside the vein (the lump often disappears when you lie down) genital warts \u2013 small, fleshy growths caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI) Click on the links above for more information on these conditions.  Lump or swelling in the testicle Most testicular lumps are harmless and aren't cancerous. Less than 4 in 100 (4%) of testicular lumps turn out to be testicular cancer.  A lump or swelling in the testicle is most likely to be one of the following: swollen and enlarged veins inside the scrotum (varicoceles) swellings caused by a build-up of fluid around the testicle (hydrocele) a cyst in the epididymis (the long, coiled tube behind the testicles) Read more about testicular lumps and swellings. Lump around the anus (bottom) Anal swellings or lumps are usually one of the following: a haemorrhoid (pile) \u2013 a swollen blood vessel that can hang outside the anus  a skin tag \u2013 a harmless growth that hangs off the skin and looks similar to a wart an abscess \u2013 a painful collection of pus a rectal prolapse \u2013 where part of the rectum (the end of the bowel) sticks out of the anus genital warts \u2013 small, fleshy growths caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI) Lump on the hand, wrist or finger A lump on the hand, wrist or finger is probably a ganglion cyst. This is a type of cyst that forms around the joints or tendons. A ganglion cyst usually appears on the back of the wrist. It's made up of a thick jelly-like fluid and feels like a smooth, soft lump under the skin. It's not clear why ganglions form, but they can be related to ageing or to injury to the joint or tendon. If the ganglion doesn't cause any pain or discomfort, it can be left and may disappear without treatment. Otherwise, you may need to have it removed. Sometimes, small rough lumps called warts develop on the hands. Warts are caused by an infection with the human papilloma virus (HPV) and are very contagious. However, they're usually harmless and clear up without treatment.  Lump on the shoulder, back, chest or arm A lump on the shoulder, back, chest or arm is most likely to be a lipoma or a cyst. A lipoma is a soft, fatty lump that grows under the skin. It's fairly common, harmless and can usually be left alone. When you press a lipoma it should feel soft and \"doughy\" to touch. It can range from the size of a pea to a few centimetres across. A cyst is a sac under the skin that contains fluid, usually pus. It can look a bit like a lipoma but is close to the surface of the skin (lipomas are deeper under the skin). Cysts are firm to the touch. A cyst may disappear without treatment or you may need to have it drained. Lump in the armpit A lump in the armpit is likely to be a swollen lymph gland, particularly if you also feel unwell and have other signs of an infection. The glands in the armpit can swell to more than a few centimetres in response to infection or illness. Swollen glands usually go down when you recover. It's uncommon for a lump in the armpit to be a lymphoma (cancer of the lymph glands), but you should see your GP if the lump doesn't go down. A small, knobbly lump in your armpit that hangs off the skin like a wart is probably a skin tag. Skin tags grow where skin rubs against skin or clothing, which is why they're often seen under the arm. They're very common and harmless, and can be left alone. When to see your GP See your GP if you develop a growth or swelling on your body. They can examine it and confirm what it is and what's causing it. If your GP is uncertain, they may recommend that you have an ultrasound scan or a biopsy. Surgery may be needed to remove certain types of lump. You should also see your GP if you have a lump that: is getting bigger is painful feels hard grows back after it's been removed In this case, your doctor will want to rule out other types of lump, such as a sarcoma (a very rare type of soft tissue cancer). You can read more about different types of soft tissue sarcoma on the Cancer Research UK website. Page last reviewed: 23\/04\/2015 Next review due: 23\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 776 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 338  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 214  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 68  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Goitre Piles (haemorrhoids) Skin tags Swollen glands Warts and verrucas External links British Association of Dermatologists: epidermoid and pilar cysts British Association of Dermatologists: patient information Lipomas Lipomas are harmless fatty lumps under the skin that can usually be left alone. However, always see your GP if you develop a growth or swelling on your body Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lumpy jaw (actinomycosis)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Actinomycosis","content":"Actinomycosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Actinomycosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Actinomycosis Clinical trials Actinomycosis Actinomycosis Symptoms Actinomycosis Causes Introduction  Actinomycosis is a rare type of bacterial infection caused by a group of bacteria called actinomycetaceae. Most bacterial infections are confined to one part of the body because the bacteria are unable to penetrate the body's tissue. However, actinomycosis is unusual in that the infection is able to move slowly but steadily through body tissue. Symptoms of actinomycosis vary depending on the type of infection, but can include: swelling and inflammation of affected tissue tissue damage that results in scar tissue formation of abscesses (pus-filled swellings) small holes or tunnels that develop in tissue and leak a type of lumpy pus Read more about the symptoms of actinomycosis. Types of actinomycosis In theory, actinomycosis can develop almost anywhere inside the tissue of the human body. But the condition tends to affect certain areas of the body and can be classified into four main types. They are: oral cervicofacial actinomycosis thoracic actinomycosis abdominal actinomycosis pelvic actinomycosis These are described below. Oral cervicofacial actinomycosis Oral cervicofacial actinomycosis is where the infection develops inside the neck, jaw or mouth. In the past, if the condition developed in the jaw it was known as lumpy jaw. Most cases of oral cervicofacial actinomycosis are caused by dental problems, such as tooth decay or a jaw injury. Oral cervicofacial actinomycosis is the most common type of actinomycosis, accounting for 50-70% of all cases. Thoracic actinomycosis Thoracic actinomycosis is where the infection develops inside the lungs or associated airways. Most cases of thoracic actinomycosis are thought to be caused by people accidentally inhaling droplets of contaminated fluid into their lungs. Thoracic actinomycosis accounts for an estimated 15-20% of cases. Abdominal actinomycosis Abdominal actinomycosis is where the infection develops inside the abdomen (tummy). This type of actinomycosis can have a range of potential causes. It can develop as a secondary complication of a more common infection, such as appendicitis, or after accidentally swallowing a foreign object, such as a chicken bone. Abdominal actinomycosis accounts for an estimated 20% of all cases. Pelvic actinomycosis Pelvic actinomycosis is where the infection develops inside the pelvis. It usually only occurs in women because most cases are caused when the actinomyces bacteria are spread from the female genitals into the pelvis. Most cases of pelvic actinomycosis are thought to be associated with the long-term use of an intrauterine device (IUD). This type of contraceptive is often known as the coil. Pelvic actinomycosis usually only occurs if the coil is left in for longer than the manufacturer recommends. Pelvic actinomycosis accounts for an estimated 10% of all cases. What causes actinomycosis? Actinomycosis is caused by a family of bacteria known as actinomycetaceae. In most cases, the bacteria live harmlessly on the lining of the mouth, throat, digestive system and vagina (in women). The bacteria only pose a problem if the tissue lining becomes damaged by injury or disease, allowing the bacteria to penetrate deeper into the body. This is potentially serious because these are anaerobic bacteria, which means they thrive in parts of the body where there isn't much oxygen, such as deep inside body tissues. However, an advantage of actinomyces bacteria being anaerobic is that they can't survive outside the human body. This means that actinomycosis isn't a contagious condition. Read more about the causes of actinomycosis. Diagnosing actinomycosis In its initial stages, actinomycosis can be a challenging condition to diagnose correctly because it shares symptoms with other more common conditions. It's often only discovered during tests or surgery to check for other conditions. For example, many cases of actinomycosis are detected when biopsies are carried out to check for cancer. A biopsy is where a small tissue sample is removed so it can be examined under a microscope. Actinomycosis can usually be more confidently diagnosed in its later stages, after the sinus tracts have appeared in the surface of the skin. This is because the sulphur granules produced by the sinus tracts during an actinomycosis infection have a distinctive shape that can be identified under a microscope. Treating actinomycosis Actinomycosis usually responds well to treatment, which involves taking a long-term course of antibiotics. Antibiotics An initial course of antibiotic injections is usually recommended for 2 to 6 weeks, followed by antibiotic tablets for another 6 to 12 months. A nurse should be able to teach you how to administer antibiotic injections at home so you don't need to stay in hospital for the duration of the course. The preferred antibiotics for treating actinomycosis are benzylpenicillin, which is used for the antibiotic injections, and amoxicillin tablets. In some cases, other bacteria are also present and more than one antibiotic or other antibiotics will need to be given. Side effects of these antibiotics include: diarrhoea  nausea (feeling sick) skin rash increased vulnerability to fungal infections, such as oral thrush (a fungal infection that occurs in the mouth) If you're allergic to penicillin, alternative antibiotics such as tetracycline or erythromycin can be used. Read more about antibiotics. Surgery In some cases, minor surgery may be required to repair the damaged tissue and drain pus out of the abscesses. Complications of actinomycosis Abscesses that develop as a result of actinomycosis may form in many parts of your body, including your lungs. They can spread easily from one part of your body to another. If the original site of the infection is located in the skin of your face, it may spread to nearby parts of your body, such as your scalp or ears. If the original site of the infection is your mouth, it may spread to your tongue, larynx (voicebox), trachea (windpipe) and salivary glands, and the tubes that connect your throat to your nose. If the infection spreads to your brain, a brain abscess could develop. Preventing actinomycosis Most cases of oral actinomycosis occur as a result of poor dental hygiene. This means practising good dental hygiene is the best way to prevent actinomycosis. Read about preventing tooth decay and dental health for more information and advice about good oral hygiene practices. How to look after your teeth Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An expert explains how looking after your teeth from an early age can help prevent painful dental problems from developing. Sadly, since the making of this film, Liana Ziotopoulos has died. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Who's affected by actinomycosis? Actinomycosis is one of the rarest types of bacterial infections. In developed countries, such as England, it's thought just 1 in 300,000 people will develop actinomycosis in any given year. On average, there are 100 admissions to hospital each year in England because of actinomycosis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening Page last reviewed: 28\/08\/2014 Next review due: 28\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 39 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Abscess Antibiotics Appendicitis Dental health Intrauterine device (IUD) Tooth decay External links BAOMS: oral surgery British Dental Health Foundation Abscess An abscess is a painful collection of pus that is usually caused by a bacterial infection Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections Find and choose services for Actinomycosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lung cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-lung","content":"Lung cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lung cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-lung Real stories Cancer-of-the-lung Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-lung Community Cancer-of-the-lung Lung cancer Cancer-of-the-lung Symptoms Cancer-of-the-lung Causes Cancer-of-the-lung Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-lung Treatment Cancer-of-the-lung Living with Cancer-of-the-lung Prevention Introduction  Lung cancer is one of the most common and serious types of cancer. Around 44,500 people are diagnosed with the condition every year in the UK. There are usually no signs or symptoms in the early stages of lung cancer, but many people with the condition eventually develop symptoms including: a persistent cough coughing up blood persistent breathlessness unexplained tiredness and weight loss an ache or pain when breathing or coughing You should see your GP if you have these symptoms. Read more about the symptoms of lung cancer. Types of lung cancer Cancer that begins in the lungs is called primary lung cancer. Cancer that spreads from the lungs to another place in the body is known as secondary lung cancer. This page is about primary lung cancer. There are two main types of primary lung cancer. These are classified by the type of cells in which the cancer starts. They are: non-small-cell lung cancer \u2013 the most common type, accounting for more than 80% of cases; can be either squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma or large-cell carcinoma small-cell lung cancer \u2013 a less common type that usually spreads faster than non-small-cell lung cancer The type of lung cancer you have determines which treatments are recommended. Read more about diagnosing lung cancer. Who's affected Lung cancer mainly affects older people. It's rare in people younger than 40, and the rates of lung cancer rise sharply with age. Lung cancer is most commonly diagnosed in people aged 70-74. Although people who have never smoked can develop lung cancer, smoking is the main cause (accounting for over 85% of cases). This is because smoking involves regularly inhaling a number of different toxic substances. Read more about: causes of lung cancer preventing lung cancer Treating lung cancer Treatment depends on the type of cancer, how far it's spread and how good your general health is. If the condition is diagnosed early and the cancerous cells are confined to a small area, surgery to remove the affected area of lung is usually recommended. If surgery is unsuitable due to your general health, radiotherapy to destroy the cancerous cells may be recommended instead. If the cancer has spread too far for surgery or radiotherapy to be effective, chemotherapy is usually used. Read more about treating lung cancer. Outlook Lung cancer doesn't usually cause noticeable symptoms until it's spread through the lungs or into other parts of the body. This means the outlook for the condition isn't as good as many other types of cancer. Overall, about 1 in 3 people with the condition live for at least a year after they're diagnosed and about 1 in 20 people live at least 10 years. However, survival rates can vary widely, depending on how far the cancer has spread at the time of diagnosis. Early diagnosis can make a big difference. Read about living with lung cancer. How well your local NHS performs Clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) are NHS organisations that organise the delivery of NHS services in England. They play a major role in achieving good health outcomes for the local population they serve. You can now check how your local CCG compares against others for lung cancer survival (PDF, 900kb). Page last reviewed: 02\/11\/2015 Next review due: 02\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 603 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 348  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Lung cancer: Peter's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, Peter talks about the symptoms that led to his lung cancer diagnosis, his treatment and the support he received from his cancer nurse specialist. Media last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Call your GP today If you've been coughing for 3 weeks or more, tell your doctor. Call your GP today Useful links NHS Choices links End of life care Lung cancer myths and facts Stop smoking Find lung cancer services External links Lung Cancer Decision Aid NHS Smokefree Cancer Research UK: lung cancer British Lung Foundation: lung cancer Macmillan: lung cancer HealthUnlocked: lung disease The Roy Castle Lung Cancer Foundation My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Community content from HealthUnlocked Asbestos and lung cancer Exposure to asbestos can cause lung cancer. Ian Wright is supporting a campaign to raise awareness among tradesmen Key times to quit smoking Eight key life events that are a great motivation to quit smoking for good Find and choose services for Lung cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find cancer support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=Cancer","content":"Find Cancer information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Cancer information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Living with cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Cancer\/Pages\/Cancerhome.aspx","content":"Living with cancer - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Living with cancer Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Cancer, living with Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus One for the Boys: why do men not talk about cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Early cancer diagnosis is key, but that doesn't mean men always get checked out when they should. In this video, actors and sports personalities try to answer the question: Why are men so dumb when it comes to talking about cancer? All NHS Choices videos Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Preparing for your cancer test results If you're waiting for your cancer test results, here's how you can prepare for your consultation. Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a diagnosis and where to find support. Plus watch a video about one man's experience of cancer. Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your priority is medical care. But you can also get help in other areas of life. Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support. Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment. Living with lung cancer Practical advice for living with lung cancer, covering finances, feelings and controlling symptoms. Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions. 'I had breast cancer and then cervical cancer' Juanita explains the impact of cancer on her life, and how charity work helps others and brings her happiness. 'I beat testicular cancer' Former footballer Neil Harris talks about having testicular cancer, including his treatment and telling his family. Cancer: end of life care Information on coping with a terminal cancer diagnosis, including advice on counselling, practical issues and financial help. Talking to your kids about cancer Talking to children about your cancer may be difficult, but these tips can make it easier for you and them. Lung cancer myths and facts We separate the facts from the fiction about lung cancer and its link with smoking and other risk factors. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler talks about her experience of being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. 'I had prostate cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Philip Kissi didn't notice any symptoms. He talks about his diagnosis and treatment. 'My daughter Caron's breast cancer' TV star Caron Keating died from breast cancer in 2004. Her mother, Gloria Hunniford, explains how she coped. Getting started Why a balanced diet is important Keep skin safe in the sun Get help to stop smoking Cut down on your drinking Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Medical Oncology Information and support for mental health Renal units Alcohol addiction Stroke End of life hospice services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Bowel cancer self-assessment Do you have any symptoms? Mole self-assessment Find out if your moles need to be checked Also on NHS Choices Different types of cancer Breast cancer: female Breast cancer: male Bowel cancer Cervical cancer Lung cancer Skin cancer: malignant melanoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Common questions about cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines Breast cancer Information on breast changes to watch out for, plus breast cancer genes, breast reconstruction and mastectomy Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lung transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lung-transplant","content":"Lung transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lung transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lung-transplant Real stories Lung-transplant Clinical trials Lung-transplant Community Lung transplant Lung-transplant Preparation Lung-transplant How it is performed Lung-transplant Risks Lung-transplant Recovery   A lung transplant is an operation to remove and replace a diseased lung with a healthy human lung from a donor. A donor is usually a person who's died, but in rare cases a section of lung can be taken from a living donor. Lung transplants aren't carried out frequently in the UK. This is mainly because of the lack of available donors. In England, during 2013-14, 198 lung transplants were carried out. When a lung transplant is needed A lung transplant will often be recommended if: a person has advanced lung disease that isn't responding to other methods of treatment a person's life expectancy is thought to be less than two to three years without a transplant Conditions that can be treated with a lung transplant include: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) \u2013 a general term for a number of conditions that damage the lungs, usually as a result of smoking cystic fibrosis \u2013 an inherited condition that causes the lungs and digestive system to become clogged up with a thick sticky mucus pulmonary hypertension \u2013 high blood pressure in the blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to the lungs idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis \u2013 scarring of the lungs Types of transplant There are three main types of lung transplant: a single lung transplant \u2013 where a single damaged lung is removed from the recipient and replaced with a lung from the donor; this is often used to treat pulmonary fibrosis, but it isn't suitable for people with cystic fibrosis because infection will spread from the remaining lung to the donated lung a double lung transplant \u2013 where both lungs are removed and replaced with two donated lungs; this is usually the main treatment option for people with cystic fibrosis or COPD a heart-lung transplant \u2013 where the heart and both lungs are removed and replaced with a donated heart and lungs; this is often recommended for people with severe pulmonary hypertension The demand for lung transplants is far greater than the available supply of donated lungs. Therefore, a transplant will only be carried out if it's thought there's a relatively good chance of it being successful. For example, a lung transplant wouldn't be recommended for someone with lung cancer because the cancer could reoccur in the donated lungs. You also won't be considered for a lung transplant if you smoke. Living donors It's possible for a person to receive a lung transplant from living donors (two living donors are usually required for one recipient). However, lung transplants from living donors are currently rare in the UK. During this type of lung transplant, the lower lobe of the right lung is removed from one donor, and the lower lobe of the left lung is removed from the other donor. Both lungs are removed from the recipient and replaced with the lung implants from the donors in a single operation. Most people who receive lung transplants from living donors have cystic fibrosis and are close relatives of the donors. The recipient and donors need to be compatible in size and have matching blood groups. Preparation Before being placed on the transplant list you'll need to have some tests to make sure your other major organs, such as your heart, kidneys and liver, will function properly after the transplant. You may also need to make lifestyle changes, such as giving up smoking and losing weight (if you're overweight), so that you're as healthy as possible when it's time for the transplant to take place. Read more about preparing for a lung transplant. The lung transplant procedure A lung transplant usually takes between four and 12 hours to complete, depending on the complexity of the operation. A cut is made in your chest and the damaged lungs removed. Depending on your individual circumstances, you may be connected to a heart and lung bypass machine to keep your blood circulating during the operation. The donated lungs will then be connected to the relevant airways and blood vessels and the chest will be closed. Read more about how a lung transplant is performed. A lung transplant is a major operation that may take at least three months to recover from. It could be quite a while before you're able to return to work so you'll need to make necessary arrangements with your employer. Read more about recovering from a lung transplant. Risks A lung transplant is a complex type of surgery that carries a high risk of complications. A common complication is the immune system rejecting the donated lungs. As a result of this, a medication known as an immunosuppressive is given to dampen the effects of the immune system, reducing the risk of rejection. However, taking immunosuppressives carries its own risks as they increase the chances of infection. Read more about risks associated with a lung transplant. Outlook The outlook for people who've had a lung transplant has improved in recent years and it's expected to continue improving. The British Transplantation Society estimates that around nine out of 10 people survive a lung transplant, with most of these surviving for at least a year after having the operation. About five out of 10 people will survive for at least five years after having a lung transplant, with many people living for at least 10 years. There have also been reports of some people living for 20 years or more after a lung transplant. Although complications can occur at any time, a serious complication is most likely to occur in the first year after the transplant. The NHS Organ Donor Register In the UK, consent (permission) is required before organs can be donated. A person can give their consent by joining the NHS Organ Donor Register or by discussing their wishes with loved ones. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is a failsafe way of ensuring your wishes are made clear. It means there's a permanent record of your wishes that doctors can check in the event of your death. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick, simple, and you can remove yourself from it at any time. Read more about organ donation. Page last reviewed: 28\/06\/2016 Next review due: 28\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 125 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Lung transplant Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A lung transplant is an operation to remove and replace a diseased lung with a healthy human lung from a donor. A donor is usually a person who has died, but in some cases a living donor may be used. In this video, a surgeon explains what lung transplants mean for those who receive them, and the limitations of donor organs. Media last reviewed: 10\/07\/2015 Next review due: 10\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Cystic fibrosis Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Heart-lung transplant Pulmonary fibrosis Pulmonary hypertension External links British Lung Foundation Cystic Fibrosis Trust NHS Blood and Transplant: organ donation NICE guidance:COPD Pulmonary Fibrosis Trust Pulmonary Hypertension Association UK Organ donation Read more about the types of organ donation, how to donate, and which organs can be donated NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Organ donation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Organ-donation","content":"Organ donation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Organ donation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Organ-donation Real stories Organ-donation Clinical trials Organ donation Organ-donation What can be donated Organ-donation Living donation Organ-donation How it works Introduction  Organ donation is where a person donates their organs for transplant. There are two types of organ donation: living and deceased. Donated organs are given to someone who has damaged organs that need to be replaced. An organ transplant may save a person's life or significantly improve their health and quality of life. The need for donors Between April 1 2013 and March 31 2014, 4,655 organ transplants were carried out in the UK thanks to the generosity of 2,466 donors. But there are always significantly more people waiting for an organ transplant than there are suitable donors. At the time of writing (24 November 2014), 6,856 people were waiting for transplants. You can visit the NHS Organ Donation website for the latest statistics, including the average waiting times for a transplant. There's a particular need for more people of African, African-Caribbean and south Asian ethnicities to join the NHS Organ Donor Register and agree to donate their organs in the event of their death. This is because donation rates among these ethnic groups are low but the need is great. People from black, Asian and ethnic minority communities are more likely to develop health conditions that can lead to kidney failure, and on average they'll wait a year longer for a kidney transplant than a white patient. There's no upper age limit for joining the register and recording your wish to be a donor. If you die in circumstances where you could potentially donate, specialist healthcare professionals decide which organs and tissues are suitable based on a number of factors, including your medical and travel history. Tissue from people in their 70s and 80s is often transplanted successfully, although organs are only selected from those under 80 years of age. Most people waiting for a donated organ need to have a kidney, heart, lung or liver transplant. One donor can help several people as they can donate a number of organs, including: kidneys liver heart lungs small bowel pancreas Tissues that can be donated include:  the cornea (the transparent layer at the front of the eye) bone skin  heart valves tendons cartilage All donors can choose which organs and tissues they wish to donate. Read more about what organs can be donated. How to donate The NHS Organ Donor Register is a confidential national database that holds the details of around 21 million people who want to donate their organs when they die. Adding your name to the register and telling your family and friends that you want to be a donor will make it easier for them to agree to donation in the event of your death. You can join the register in a number of ways. For example, you can: complete an online form  call the free NHS Donor Line on 0300 123 23 23 \u2013 lines are open 24 hours a day, 365 days a year text SAVE to 62323 Read about how organ donation works for further details about joining the NHS Organ Donor Register and the donation process. Even though about a third of the population have joined the register, less than 5,000 people a year die in circumstances that allow them to donate their organs. This means it's even more important for as many people as possible to talk about donation and join the register so no donation is wasted. Remember to discuss your decision with your family so they're aware. Checking for a match When an organ becomes available for donation, it's checked to make sure it's healthy. The blood and tissue type of both donor and recipient are also checked to ensure they're compatible. The better the match, the greater the chance of a successful outcome. People from the same ethnic group are more likely to be a close match. Those with rare tissue types may only be able to accept an organ from someone of the same ethnic origin. This is why it's important that people from all ethnic backgrounds register to donate their organs. Types of donation There are three different ways of donating an organ. These are known as: donation after brain stem death donation after circulatory death living organ donation These are described below. Donation after brain stem death Most organ donors are patients who die as a result of a brain haemorrhage, severe head injury or stroke and are on a ventilator in a hospital intensive care unit (ICU). These donors are called donation after brain stem death donors. Death is diagnosed by brain stem tests. There are very strict standards for doing these tests and they're always carried out by two experienced doctors. A ventilator provides oxygen, which keeps the heart beating and blood circulating after death. Organs such as hearts, lungs and livers can be donated by a DBD donor. Donation after circulatory death Patients who die in hospital but aren't on a ventilator can donate their kidneys and, in certain circumstances, other organs. They're called donors after circulatory death. In these cases, the organs must be removed within a few minutes of the heart stopping to prevent them being damaged by a lack of oxygenated blood. Both types of donors can donate their corneas and other tissue. Living organ donation Living organ donation usually involves one family member donating an organ to another family member or partner. The relative is usually related by blood \u2013 a parent, brother, sister, or child. It's also now possible to be an altruistic donor. Altruistic donors are unrelated to the patient but become donors as an act of personal generosity. Kidneys are often donated from living donors as a healthy person can lead a normal life with only one kidney. Read more about living donation. Page last reviewed: 24\/11\/2014 Next review due: 24\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 312 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood donation Bone marrow donation Bone marrow transplant Can my organs be removed after I die? Heart-lung transplant Heart transplant Kidney transplant Liver transplant External links HTA: body, organ and tissue donations Join the organ donor register NHS Organ Donation The history of donation The history of blood and organ donation explained in an interactive timeline Could you be a donor? Every year 1,000 people die waiting for a transplant. It's easy to register as an organ donor or give blood NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lupus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lupus","content":"Lupus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lupus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lupus Clinical trials Lupus Community Lupus Lupus Symptoms Lupus Causes Lupus Diagnosis Lupus Treatment Lupus Complications Introduction  Lupus is a complex and poorly understood condition that affects many parts of the body and causes symptoms ranging from mild to life-threatening. Types of lupus There are some types of lupus that just affect the skin \u2013 such as discoid lupus erythematosus and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Some medications can also cause lupus-like side effects. However, the term \"lupus\" is most often used to describe a more severe form of the condition called systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), which can affect many parts of the body, including the skin, joints and internal organs. Symptoms range from mild to severe, and many people will have long periods with few or no symptoms before experiencing a sudden flare-up, where their symptoms are particularly severe. Even mild cases can be distressing and have a considerable impact on a person\u2019s quality of life. The rest of this article will focus on SLE. Signs and symptoms SLE can cause a wide range of symptoms, depending on the areas of the body that are affected. The most common symptoms are: fatigue (extreme tiredness) rashes \u2013 particularly on the face, wrists and hands joint pain and swelling As the symptoms of SLE can be similar to a number of other conditions, many of which are more common, it can be difficult to diagnose. If you have persistent or troublesome symptoms that you think could be caused by SLE, you should see your GP so they can try to determine the cause. Read more about the symptoms of lupus and diagnosing lupus.  What causes lupus? SLE is an autoimmune condition, which means it is caused by problems with the immune system. For reasons not yet understood, the immune system in people with SLE starts to attack and inflame healthy cells, tissue and organs. As with other more common autoimmune conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis, it is thought a combination of genetic and environmental factors may be responsible for triggering SLE in certain people. Read more about the causes of lupus. Who is affected SLE is an uncommon condition that is estimated to affect around 15,000 people in England and Wales. Around 90% of cases occur in women. The condition is most common in women of childbearing age (between the ages of 15 and 50), but it can also affect people of other ages. The condition tends to be less common in people of white European origin and more common in those of African, Caribbean or Asian origin. How lupus is treated There is currently no cure for SLE, but there are different medications that can help relieve many of the symptoms and reduce the chances of organ damage. These medications include: hydroxychloroquine \u2013 a medicine that has historically been used to treat malaria, but can also help treat some symptoms of SLE corticosteroids \u2013 anti-inflammatory medications immunosuppressants \u2013 a group of medicines that suppress your immune system With good levels of support from friends, family and healthcare professionals, many people with SLE are able to manage their condition effectively. Read more about treating lupus. Outlook A few decades ago SLE was regarded as a terminal condition, as many people would die of an associated complication within a few years of being diagnosed. As a result of early diagnosis and advances in treatment, however, the outlook for SLE is now much better. The vast majority of people diagnosed with the condition will have a normal or near-normal life expectancy. However, some people with SLE are still at risk of life-threatening complications as a result of damage to internal organs and tissues, such as heart attack or stroke. SLE, and some of the treatments for it, can also increase your risk of developing potentially serious infections. Read more about the complications of lupus. Information about you If you have SLE, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Systemic lupus erythematosus can affect the internal organs as well as the skin  Drug-induced lupus There are many medications known to cause lupus-like side effects in some people. These include the antipsychotic chlorpromazine and the antibiotic minocycline. Stopping the course of medication will usually help resolve symptoms of drug-induced lupus, although you should not suddenly stop taking any prescribed medication without first checking with your GP or specialist. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 07\/09\/2014 Next review due: 07\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 691 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 308  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 216  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Antiphospholipid syndrome Sjogren's syndrome Living with pain External links Lupus UK St Thomas\u2019 Lupus Trust The Hibbs Lupus Trust Arthritis Research UK: SLE Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Long-term conditions and pregnancy Find out the health issues that can affect pregnancy and antenatal care Find and choose services for Lupus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lyme disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lyme-disease","content":"Lyme disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lyme disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lyme-disease Clinical trials Lyme disease   Lyme disease, or Lyme borreliosis, is a bacterial infection spread to humans by infected ticks. Ticks are tiny spider-like creatures found in woodland and heath areas. They feed on the blood of birds and mammals, including humans. Ticks that carry the bacteria responsible for Lyme disease are found throughout the UK and in other parts of Europe and North America. It's estimated there are 2,000 to 3,000 new cases of Lyme disease in England and Wales each year. About 15% of cases occur while people are abroad. Lyme disease can often be treated effectively if it's detected early on. But if it's not treated or treatment is delayed, there's a risk you could develop severe and long-lasting symptoms. This page covers: Signs and symptoms of Lyme disease When to see your GP How you get Lyme disease Who's at risk and where are ticks found? Treating Lyme disease Preventing Lyme disease How to remove a tick Chronic Lyme disease Further information Signs and symptoms of Lyme disease Early symptoms Many people with early-stage Lyme disease develop a distinctive circular rash at the site of the tick bite, usually around three to 30 days after being bitten. This is known as erythema migrans. The rash is often described as looking like a bull's-eye on a dart board. The affected area of skin will be red and the edges may feel slightly raised. The size of the rash can vary significantly and it may expand over several days or weeks. Typically it's around 15cm (6 inches) across, but it can be much larger or smaller than this. Some people may develop several rashes in different parts of their body. However, around one in three people with Lyme disease won't develop this rash. Some people with Lyme disease also experience flu-like symptoms in the early stages, such as tiredness (fatigue), muscle pain, joint pain, headaches, a high temperature (fever), chills and neck stiffness.  Later symptoms More serious symptoms may develop several weeks, months or even years later if Lyme disease is left untreated or is not treated early on. These can include: pain and swelling in the joints (inflammatory arthritis) problems affecting the nervous system \u2013 such as numbness and pain in your limbs, paralysis of your facial muscles, memory problems and difficulty concentrating heart problems \u2013 such as inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis) or sac surrounding the heart (pericarditis), heart block and heart failure inflammation of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) \u2013 which can cause a severe headache, a stiff neck and increased sensitivity to light Some of these problems will get better slowly with treatment, although they can persist if treatment is started late. A few people with Lyme disease go on to develop long-term symptoms similar to those of fibromyalgia or chronic fatigue syndrome. This is known as post-infectious Lyme disease. It's not clear exactly why this happens, but it's likely to be related to overactivity of your immune system rather than persistent infection. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you develop any of the symptoms described above after being bitten by a tick, or if you think you may have been bitten. Make sure you let your GP know if you've spent time in woodland or heath areas where ticks are known to live. Diagnosing Lyme disease is often difficult as many of the symptoms are similar to other conditions. A spreading rash some days after a known tick bite should be treated with appropriate antibiotics without waiting for the results of a blood test. Blood tests can be carried out to confirm the diagnosis after a few weeks, but these can be negative in the early stages of the infection. You may need to be re-tested if Lyme disease is still suspected after a negative test result. In the UK, two types of blood test are used to ensure Lyme disease is diagnosed accurately. This is because a single blood test can sometimes produce a positive result even when a person doesn't have the infection. If you have post-infectious Lyme disease or long-lasting symptoms, you may see a specialist in microbiology or infectious diseases. They can arrange for blood samples to be sent to the national reference laboratory run by Public Health England (PHE), where further tests for other tick-borne infections can be carried out. How you get Lyme disease If a tick bites an animal carrying the bacteria that cause Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi), the tick can also become infected. The tick can then transfer the bacteria to a human by biting them. Ticks can be found in any areas with deep or overgrown vegetation where they have access to animals to feed on. They're common in woodland and heath areas, but can also be found in gardens or parks. Ticks don't jump or fly, but climb on to your clothes or skin if you brush against something they're on. They then bite into the skin and start to feed on your blood. Generally, you're more likely to become infected if the tick remains attached to your skin for more than 24 hours. But ticks are very small and their bites are not painful, so you may not realise you have one attached to your skin. Who's at risk and where are ticks found? People who spend time in woodland or heath areas in the UK and parts of Europe or North America are most at risk of developing Lyme disease. Most tick bites happen in late spring, early summer and autumn because these are the times of year when most people take part in outdoor activities, such as hiking and camping. Cases of Lyme disease have been reported throughout the UK, but areas known to have a particularly high population of ticks include: Exmoor the New Forest and other rural areas of Hampshire the South Downs parts of Wiltshire and Berkshire parts of Surrey and West Sussex Thetford Forest in Norfolk the Lake District the North York Moors the Scottish Highlands It's thought only a small proportion of ticks carry the bacteria that cause Lyme disease, so being bitten doesn't mean you'll definitely be infected. However, it's important to be aware of the risk and seek medical advice if you start to feel unwell. Treating Lyme disease If you develop symptoms of Lyme disease, you will normally be given a course of antibiotic tablets, capsules or liquid. Most people will require a two- to four-week course, depending on the stage of the condition. If you are prescribed antibiotics, it's important you finish the course even if you are feeling better, because this will help ensure all the bacteria are killed. If your symptoms are particularly severe, you may be referred to a specialist to have antibiotic injections (intravenous antibiotics). Some of the antibiotics used to treat Lyme disease can make your skin more sensitive to sunlight. In these cases, you should avoid prolonged exposure to the sun and not use sunbeds until after you have finished the treatment. There's currently no clear consensus on the best treatment for post-infectious Lyme disease because the underlying cause is not yet clear. Be wary of internet sites offering alternative diagnostic tests and treatments that may not be supported by scientific evidence. Preventing Lyme disease There is currently no vaccine available to prevent Lyme disease. The best way to prevent the condition is to be aware of the risks when you visit areas where ticks are found and to take sensible precautions. You can reduce the risk of infection by: keeping to footpaths and avoiding long grass when out walking wearing appropriate clothing in tick-infested areas (a long-sleeved shirt and trousers tucked into your socks) wearing light-coloured fabrics that may help you spot a tick on your clothes using insect repellent on exposed skin inspecting your skin for ticks, particularly at the end of the day, including your head, neck and skin folds (armpits, groin, and waistband) \u2013 remove any ticks you find promptly checking your children's head and neck areas, including their scalp making sure ticks are not brought home on your clothes checking that pets do not bring ticks into your home in their fur How to remove a tick If you find a tick on your or your child's skin, remove it by gently gripping it as close to the skin as possible, preferably using fine-toothed tweezers. Pull steadily away from the skin without twisting or crushing the tick. Wash your skin with water and soap afterwards, and apply an antiseptic cream to the skin around the bite. Don't use a lit cigarette end, a match head or substances such as alcohol or petroleum jelly to force the tick out. Some veterinary surgeries and pet shops sell inexpensive tick removal devices, which may be useful if you frequently spend time in areas where there are ticks. \"Chronic Lyme disease\" There has recently been a lot of focus on Lyme disease in the media, with much attention on people who've been diagnosed with \"chronic Lyme disease\". This term has been used by some people to describe persistent symptoms such as tiredness, aches and pains, usually in the absence of a confirmed Lyme disease infection. It's different to \"post-infectious Lyme disease\" (see above), which is used to describe persistent symptoms after a confirmed and treated infection. It's important to be aware that a diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease is controversial. Experts do not agree on whether the condition exists, or whether the symptoms are actually caused by a different, undiagnosed problem. In either case, there's no evidence to suggest people diagnosed with chronic Lyme disease can pass the condition on to others, and there's little clear evidence about how best to treat it. Further information Public Health England: Lyme disease: guidance, data and analysis Public Health England: Lyme disease signs and symptoms (PDF, 335kb) Page last reviewed: 31\/03\/2015 Next review due: 31\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1474 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 601  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 375  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 130  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 279  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Insect bites and stings Travel health External links Fit for Travel: Lyme disease Lab Tests Online UK: Lyme disease tests Lyme Disease Action Public Health England: ticks and your health (PDF, 320kb) Public Health England: Lyme disease: guidance, data and analysis Public Health England: Lyme disease signs and symptoms Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Find and choose services for Lyme disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lymphoedema","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lymphoedema","content":"Lymphoedema - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lymphoedema  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lymphoedema Clinical trials Lymphoedema Community Lymphoedema Lymphoedema Symptoms Lymphoedema Causes Lymphoedema Diagnosis Lymphoedema Treatment Lymphoedema Complications Lymphoedema Prevention Introduction  Lymphoedema is a chronic (long-term) condition that causes swelling in the body's tissues. It can affect any part of the body, but usually develops in the arms or legs. Other symptoms of lymphoedema can include an aching, heavy feeling in affected body parts and difficulty moving them. Lymphoedema can get worse if it's not treated, so you should speak to a doctor if you think you may have the condition. Read more about the symptoms of lymphoedema and diagnosing lymphoedema. What causes lymphoedema? Lymphoedema is caused by a problem with the lymphatic system. This is a network of vessels and glands distributed throughout the body. Its major functions are helping to fight infection and drain excess fluid from tissues. Abnormal development of the lymphatic system, damage to it, and\/or an increase in fluid in the body tissues can all lead to lymphoedema. There are two main types of lymphoedema: primary lymphoedema \u2013 caused by faulty genes affecting the development of the lymphatic system; it can develop at any age, but usually occurs in early adulthood secondary lymphoedema \u2013 caused by damage to the lymphatic system or problems with the movement and drainage of fluid in the lymphatic system, often due to an infection, injury, cancer treatment, inflammation of the limb or a lack of limb movement  Read more about the causes of lymphoedema. Who is affected A recent study has suggested that over 200,000 people in the UK may be living with lymphoedema.  Secondary lymphoedema has been shown to affect approximately one in five women after breast cancer treatment. Primary lymphoedema is less common than secondary lymphoedema, and is estimated to affect around one in every 6,000 people. How lymphoedema is treated There is no cure for lymphoedema, but it is usually possible to control the main symptoms using techniques to minimise fluid build-up and stimulate the flow of fluid through the lymphatic system. These include wearing compression garments, taking good care of your skin, moving and exercising regularly, having a healthy diet and lifestyle, and using specialised massage techniques. Read more about treating lymphoedema and preventing lymphoedema. Complications The build-up of fluid in the tissues of people with lymphoedema means they are more vulnerable to infection. In particular, a bacterial infection of the skin called cellulitis is commonly reported in people with the condition. Read more about the complications of lymphoedema. Lymphoedema: Philippa's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Primary lymphoedema is a long-term condition that causes swelling in the legs. In this video, Philippa describes how she lives with this condition. Media last reviewed: 23\/04\/2015 Next review due: 23\/04\/2017 The lymphatic system The lymphatic system is made up of a network of vessels (channels) and small glands called lymph nodes, which are distributed throughout the body and carry a fluid called lymph. The lymphatic system has two important functions: helping to fight infection \u2013 lymph nodes contain infection-fighting cells such as lymphocytes draining excess fluid from tissue \u2013 as blood circulates through your tissue, it leaves behind waste products such as fluids and proteins; this is removed from the tissues by the lymphatic system, which filters out any bacteria or viruses, and drains the remaining lymph back into your blood Page last reviewed: 20\/10\/2014 Next review due: 20\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 428 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 201  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 138  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Healthy skin Breast cancer Mastectomy Radiotherapy Oedema External links Lymphoedema Support Network Cancer Research UK: lymphoedema Macmillan: lymphoedema Breast Cancer Care: lymphoedema NICE guidance: liposuction for lymphoedema British Lymphology Society Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Look after your skin Benefit your skin by stopping smoking, plus how to protect your skin against sun damage and more Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lymphoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/non-hodgkins-lymphoma\/Pages\/Definition.aspx","content":"Non-Hodgkin lymphoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-Hodgkin lymphoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview non-hodgkins-lymphoma Clinical trials Non-Hodgkin lymphoma non-hodgkins-lymphoma Symptoms non-hodgkins-lymphoma Causes non-hodgkins-lymphoma Diagnosis non-hodgkins-lymphoma Treatment non-hodgkins-lymphoma Complications Introduction  Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is an uncommon cancer that develops in the lymphatic system, which is a network of vessels and glands spread throughout your body. The lymphatic system is part of your immune system. Clear fluid called lymph flows through the lymphatic vessels and contains infection-fighting white blood cells known as lymphocytes. In non-Hodgkin lymphoma, the affected lymphocytes start to multiply in an abnormal way and begin to collect in certain parts of the lymphatic system, such as the lymph nodes (glands). The affected lymphocytes lose their infection-fighting properties, making you more vulnerable to infection. The most common symptom of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a painless swelling in a lymph node, usually in the neck, armpit or groin.  Read more about the symptoms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  Who's affected? In the UK, more than 12,000 people are diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma each year. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma can occur at any age, but your chances of developing the condition increase as you get older, with most cases diagnosed in people over 65. Slightly more men than women are affected. What causes non-Hodgkin lymphoma? The exact cause of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is unknown. However, your risk of developing the condition is increased if: you have a medical condition that weakens your immune system you take immunosuppressant medication you've previously been exposed to a common virus called the Epstein-Barr virus \u2013 which causes glandular fever You also have a slightly increased risk of developing non-Hodgkin lymphoma if a first-degree relative (such as a parent or sibling) has had the condition. Read more about the causes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. How non-Hodgkin lymphoma is diagnosed The only way to confirm a diagnosis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is by carrying out a biopsy. This is a minor surgical procedure where a sample of affected lymph node tissue is removed and studied in a laboratory. Read more about diagnosing non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Treatment and outlook There are many subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, but they can generally be put into one of two broad categories: high-grade or aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma \u2013 where the cancer develops quickly and aggressively low-grade or indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma \u2013 where the cancer develops slowly, and you may not experience any symptoms for many years The outlook for non-Hodgkin lymphoma varies greatly, depending on the exact type, grade and extent of the lymphoma, and the person\u2019s age. Low-grade tumours don't necessarily require immediate medical treatment, but are harder to completely cure. High-grade lymphomas need to be treated straight away, but tend to respond much better to treatment and can often be cured.  The main treatments used for non-Hodgkin lymphoma are: chemotherapy radiotherapy  a type of targeted treatment called monoclonal antibody therapy Overall, most cases of non-Hodgkin lymphoma are considered very treatable. You can read more detailed information about the outlook for non-Hodgkin lymphoma on the Cancer Research UK website. However, there's a risk of long-term problems after treatment, including infertility and an increased risk of developing another type of cancer in the future. Read more about:  treating non-Hodgkin lymphoma  complications of non-Hodgkin lymphoma Information about you If you have non-Hodgkin lymphoma, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/11\/2015 Next review due: 03\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 261 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is the most common type of lymphoma in the UK, with more than 12,000 people diagnosed each year. An expert describes the symptoms, and Maureen talks about her experience of living with the condition. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Hodgkin lymphoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Bone marrow transplant Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Macmillan: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Bloodwise: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Lymphoma Association Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Flu and the flu vaccine Your guide to flu symptoms and the flu vaccine, including who should be vaccinated this winter NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find cancer support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=Cancer","content":"Find Cancer information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Cancer information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Living with cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Cancer\/Pages\/Cancerhome.aspx","content":"Living with cancer - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Living with cancer Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Cancer, living with Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus One for the Boys: why do men not talk about cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Early cancer diagnosis is key, but that doesn't mean men always get checked out when they should. In this video, actors and sports personalities try to answer the question: Why are men so dumb when it comes to talking about cancer? All NHS Choices videos Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Preparing for your cancer test results If you're waiting for your cancer test results, here's how you can prepare for your consultation. Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a diagnosis and where to find support. Plus watch a video about one man's experience of cancer. Cancer and social care If you have cancer, your priority is medical care. But you can also get help in other areas of life. Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support. Cancer and fertility Find out ways to help preserve your fertility before you start your cancer treatment. Living with lung cancer Practical advice for living with lung cancer, covering finances, feelings and controlling symptoms. Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions. 'I had breast cancer and then cervical cancer' Juanita explains the impact of cancer on her life, and how charity work helps others and brings her happiness. 'I beat testicular cancer' Former footballer Neil Harris talks about having testicular cancer, including his treatment and telling his family. Cancer: end of life care Information on coping with a terminal cancer diagnosis, including advice on counselling, practical issues and financial help. Talking to your kids about cancer Talking to children about your cancer may be difficult, but these tips can make it easier for you and them. Lung cancer myths and facts We separate the facts from the fiction about lung cancer and its link with smoking and other risk factors. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler talks about her experience of being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. 'I had prostate cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Philip Kissi didn't notice any symptoms. He talks about his diagnosis and treatment. 'My daughter Caron's breast cancer' TV star Caron Keating died from breast cancer in 2004. Her mother, Gloria Hunniford, explains how she coped. Getting started Why a balanced diet is important Keep skin safe in the sun Get help to stop smoking Cut down on your drinking Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Medical Oncology Information and support for mental health Renal units Alcohol addiction Stroke End of life hospice services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Bowel cancer self-assessment Do you have any symptoms? Mole self-assessment Find out if your moles need to be checked Also on NHS Choices Different types of cancer Breast cancer: female Breast cancer: male Bowel cancer Cervical cancer Lung cancer Skin cancer: malignant melanoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Common questions about cancer News analysis: Michael Douglas, oral sex and throat cancer Actor Michael Douglas is understood to have said his recent throat cancer was caused by oral sex. We look behind the headlines Breast cancer Information on breast changes to watch out for, plus breast cancer genes, breast reconstruction and mastectomy Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lymphoma, Hodgkin","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Hodgkins-lymphoma","content":"Hodgkin lymphoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hodgkin lymphoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Hodgkins-lymphoma Clinical trials Hodgkin lymphoma Hodgkins-lymphoma Symptoms Hodgkins-lymphoma Causes Hodgkins-lymphoma Diagnosis Hodgkins-lymphoma Treatment Hodgkins-lymphoma Complications Introduction  Hodgkin lymphoma is an uncommon cancer that develops in the lymphatic system, which is a network of vessels and glands spread throughout your body. The lymphatic system is part of your immune system. Clear fluid called lymph flows through the lymphatic vessels and contains infection-fighting white blood cells, known as lymphocytes. In Hodgkin lymphoma, B-lymphocytes (a particular type of lymphocyte) start to multiply in an abnormal way and begin to collect in certain parts of the lymphatic system, such as the lymph nodes (glands). The affected lymphocytes lose their infection-fighting properties, making you more vulnerable to infection. The most common symptom of Hodgkin lymphoma is a painless swelling in a lymph node, usually in the neck, armpit or groin. Read more about the symptoms of Hodgkin lymphoma. Who's affected? Hodgkin lymphoma can develop at any age, but it mostly affects young adults in their early 20s and older adults over the age of 70. Slightly more men than women are affected. Around 1,900 people are diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma in the UK each year. What causes Hodgkin lymphoma? The exact cause of Hodgkin lymphoma is unknown. However, your risk of developing the condition is increased if: you have a medical condition that weakens your immune system you take immunosuppressant medication you've previously been exposed to a common virus called the Epstein-Barr virus \u2013 which causes glandular fever You also have an increased risk of developing Hodgkin lymphoma if a first-degree relative (parent, sibling or child) has had the condition. Read more about the causes of Hodgkin lymphoma. How Hodgkin lymphoma is diagnosed The only way to confirm a diagnosis of Hodgkin lymphoma is by carrying out a biopsy. This is a minor surgical procedure where a sample of affected lymph node tissue is removed and studied in a laboratory. Read more about diagnosing Hodgkin lymphoma. Treatment and outlook Hodgkin lymphoma is a relatively aggressive cancer and can quickly spread through the body. Despite this, it's also one of the most easily treated types of cancer. Your recommended treatment plan will depend on your general health and age, because many of the treatments can put a tremendous strain on the body. How far the cancer has spread is also an important factor in determining the best treatment. The main treatments used are chemotherapy, followed by radiotherapy or chemotherapy alone. Surgery isn't generally used as a treatment for the condition. Overall, around 85% of people with Hodgkin lymphoma live at least five years and most of these will be cured. However, there's a risk of long-term problems after treatment, including infertility and an increased risk of developing another type of cancer in the future. Read more about: treatment for Hodgkin lymphoma complications of Hodgkin lymphoma Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/10\/2015 Next review due: 15\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 210 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Find cancer support services Living with cancer Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: Hodgkin lymphoma Bloodwise: Hodgkin lymphoma Lymphoma Association Macmillan: Hodgkin lymphoma Have you had your flu jab? If you have lymphoma you should have a flu jab every year. Find out why and how Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lymphoma, non-Hodgkin","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/non-hodgkins-lymphoma","content":"Non-Hodgkin lymphoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-Hodgkin lymphoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview non-hodgkins-lymphoma Clinical trials Non-Hodgkin lymphoma non-hodgkins-lymphoma Symptoms non-hodgkins-lymphoma Causes non-hodgkins-lymphoma Diagnosis non-hodgkins-lymphoma Treatment non-hodgkins-lymphoma Complications Introduction  Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is an uncommon cancer that develops in the lymphatic system, which is a network of vessels and glands spread throughout your body. The lymphatic system is part of your immune system. Clear fluid called lymph flows through the lymphatic vessels and contains infection-fighting white blood cells known as lymphocytes. In non-Hodgkin lymphoma, the affected lymphocytes start to multiply in an abnormal way and begin to collect in certain parts of the lymphatic system, such as the lymph nodes (glands). The affected lymphocytes lose their infection-fighting properties, making you more vulnerable to infection. The most common symptom of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a painless swelling in a lymph node, usually in the neck, armpit or groin.  Read more about the symptoms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  Who's affected? In the UK, more than 12,000 people are diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma each year. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma can occur at any age, but your chances of developing the condition increase as you get older, with most cases diagnosed in people over 65. Slightly more men than women are affected. What causes non-Hodgkin lymphoma? The exact cause of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is unknown. However, your risk of developing the condition is increased if: you have a medical condition that weakens your immune system you take immunosuppressant medication you've previously been exposed to a common virus called the Epstein-Barr virus \u2013 which causes glandular fever You also have a slightly increased risk of developing non-Hodgkin lymphoma if a first-degree relative (such as a parent or sibling) has had the condition. Read more about the causes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. How non-Hodgkin lymphoma is diagnosed The only way to confirm a diagnosis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is by carrying out a biopsy. This is a minor surgical procedure where a sample of affected lymph node tissue is removed and studied in a laboratory. Read more about diagnosing non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Treatment and outlook There are many subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, but they can generally be put into one of two broad categories: high-grade or aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma \u2013 where the cancer develops quickly and aggressively low-grade or indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma \u2013 where the cancer develops slowly, and you may not experience any symptoms for many years The outlook for non-Hodgkin lymphoma varies greatly, depending on the exact type, grade and extent of the lymphoma, and the person\u2019s age. Low-grade tumours don't necessarily require immediate medical treatment, but are harder to completely cure. High-grade lymphomas need to be treated straight away, but tend to respond much better to treatment and can often be cured.  The main treatments used for non-Hodgkin lymphoma are: chemotherapy radiotherapy  a type of targeted treatment called monoclonal antibody therapy Overall, most cases of non-Hodgkin lymphoma are considered very treatable. You can read more detailed information about the outlook for non-Hodgkin lymphoma on the Cancer Research UK website. However, there's a risk of long-term problems after treatment, including infertility and an increased risk of developing another type of cancer in the future. Read more about:  treating non-Hodgkin lymphoma  complications of non-Hodgkin lymphoma Information about you If you have non-Hodgkin lymphoma, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/11\/2015 Next review due: 03\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 261 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is the most common type of lymphoma in the UK, with more than 12,000 people diagnosed each year. An expert describes the symptoms, and Maureen talks about her experience of living with the condition. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Hodgkin lymphoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Bone marrow transplant Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Macmillan: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Bloodwise: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Lymphoma Association Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Flu and the flu vaccine Your guide to flu symptoms and the flu vaccine, including who should be vaccinated this winter NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}