{"conditions":[{"name":"Vaccinations","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaccinations","content":"Vaccination schedule - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: When to have vaccinations Here's a checklist of the vaccines that are routinely offered to everyone in the UK for free on the NHS, and the ages at which they should ideally be given. If you're not sure whether you or your child have had all your routine vaccinations, ask your GP or practice nurse to find out for you. It may be possible to catch up later in life. Try to have your vaccinations delivered on time to ensure protection. If you're going to be away from the GP surgery when a vaccination is due, talk to your doctor. It may be possible to arrange to have the vaccination at a different location. 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine \u2013 this single jab contains vaccines to protect against five separate diseases: diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough (pertussis), polio and Haemophilus influenzae type b (known as Hib \u2013 a bacterial infection that can cause severe pneumonia or meningitis in young children)   Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine, second dose Men C vaccine (DISCONTINUED from July 1 2016) Rotavirus vaccine, second dose 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine, third dose Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine, second dose Men B vaccine second dose  One year Hib\/Men C vaccine, given as a single jab containing vaccines against meningitis C (first dose) and Hib (fourth dose) Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, given as a single jab Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine, third dose Men B vaccine, third dose  2-7 years (including children in school years 1, 2 and 3) Children's flu vaccine (annual) 3 years and 4 months Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, second dose 4-in-1 pre-school booster, given as a single jab containing vaccines against diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough (pertussis) and polio 12-13 years (girls only) HPV vaccine, which protects against cervical cancer \u2013 two injections given 6-12 months apart 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster, given as a single jab and contains vaccines against diphtheria, tetanus and polio Men ACWY vaccine, given as a single jab and contains vaccines against meningitis A, C, W and Y 65 years Pneumococcal (PPV) vaccine 65 and over Flu vaccine (every year) 70 years (and 78 and 79 year-olds as a catchup) Shingles vaccine Vaccines for special groups There are some vaccines that aren't routinely available to everyone on the NHS, but that are available for people who fall into certain risk groups, such as vaccines for pregnant women, people with long-term health conditions, and healthcare workers. Additional vaccines for special groups include: flu jab for pregnant women whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women flu vaccine for people with long-term health conditions hepatitis B vaccination  TB vaccination chickenpox vaccination Men ACWY for first-time university entrants Travel vaccines There are some travel vaccines that you should be able to have free on the NHS from your local surgery. These include: hepatitis A vaccine typhoid vaccine  cholera vaccine Other travel vaccines, such as yellow fever vaccination, are only available privately.  Find out more from our section on travel vaccines. Page last reviewed: 14\/03\/2016 Next review due: 14\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 924 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 490  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 241  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Vaccination calendar Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against Men B vaccine A new Men B vaccine called Bexsero is available on the NHS for babies aged 8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year old NHS Choices links Common questions about vaccination External links Complete NHS immunisation schedule (PDF, 77.6kb) GOV.UK: vaccination timeline (PDF, 2.6Mb) healthtalk.org: real vaccination stories from parents     Search for a local GP Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"BCG (tuberculosis) vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/bcg-tuberculosis-TB-vaccine.aspx","content":"BCG tuberculosis (TB) vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: BCG tuberculosis (TB) vaccine The BCG vaccine protects against tuberculosis, which is also known as TB. TB is a serious infection which affects the lungs and sometimes other parts of the body, such as the bones, joints and kidneys. It can also cause meningitis. Read more about tuberculosis (TB). Who should have the BCG vaccine? The BCG vaccine (which stands for Bacillus Calmette-Guérin vaccine) is not given as part of the routine NHS vaccination schedule. It's given on the NHS only when a child or adult is thought to have an increased risk of coming into contact with TB. BCG for babies BCG vaccination is recommended for babies who are born in areas where TB rates are higher than in the rest of the country, including some parts of inner London. BCG for children BCG vaccination may also be recommended for older children who have an increased risk of developing TB, such as: children who have recently arrived from countries with high levels of TB, including those in sub-Saharan Africa, the Indian sub-continent and parts of Eastern Europe children who have come into close contact with somebody infected with respiratory TB BCG for adults BCG vaccination is rarely given to anyone over the age of 16 \u2013 and never over the age of 35, because it doesn't work very well in adults. It is, however, given to adults aged 16 to 35 who are at risk of TB through their work, such as some healthcare workers. Read more about who should have the BCG vaccine. How is the BCG vaccination given? BCG vaccination is given as an injection into the upper arm. The vaccination usually leaves a small scar. Read more about potential BCG vaccination side effects. When is the BCG vaccination given? If it's advised that your baby has the BCG vaccine, the injection is usually offered soon after birth, while your baby is still in hospital. Alternatively, your baby can be referred to a local healthcare centre for vaccination after they've left hospital. This may not necessarily be the local GP surgery, as not all surgeries can provide this service. If you are offered BCG vaccination as an adult, it will be arranged by a local healthcare centre. How effective is BCG vaccination? The BCG vaccine is made from a weakened strain of TB bacteria. Because the bacteria in the vaccine is weak, it triggers the immune system to protect against the disease, giving good immunity to people who receive it, without actually causing the disease. The vaccine is 70-80% effective against the most severe forms of TB, such as TB meningitis in children. It is less effective in preventing respiratory disease, which is the more common form of TB in adults. Read more about the BCG vaccine. Page last reviewed: 26\/04\/2016 Next review due: 26\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 272 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Tuberculosis TB is a bacterial infection caught by inhaling tiny drops from the coughs or sneezes of an infected person NHS Choices links Common questions about vaccination NHS vaccination schedule External links  NHS leaflet: TB, BCG and your baby (PDF, 203kb) healthtalk.org: real stories   Where in the world is TB widespread? TB alert charity Search for services Find and compare services Services GP Infectious Diseases Parenting information and support services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chickenpox (varicella) vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/chickenpox-vaccine.aspx","content":"Chickenpox (varicella) vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Chickenpox vaccine The chickenpox vaccine protects against the varicella zoster virus that causes chickenpox. The chickenpox vaccine is not part of the routine childhood vaccination schedule. It is currently only offered on the NHS to people who are in close contact with someone who is particularly vulnerable to chickenpox or its complications. There are two chickenpox vaccines currently available. The brand names of the chickenpox vaccine are VARIVAX and VARILRIX. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for VARIVAX. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for VARILRIX Who is at risk from chickenpox? Chickenpox is a common childhood infection. Usually, it's mild and complications are rare. Almost all children develop immunity to chickenpox after infection, so most only catch it once. The disease can be more severe in adults. Certain groups of people, however, are at greater risk of serious complications from chickenpox. These include: people who have weakened immune systems through illnesses such as HIV or treatments like chemotherapy pregnant women \u2013 chickenpox can be very serious for an unborn baby when a pregnant woman catches the infection. It can cause a range of serious birth defects, as well as severe disease in the baby when it is born. Read more about what to do if you catch or are exposed to chickenpox in pregnancy Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? It is recommended for certain individuals, such as: non-immune healthcare workers people who come into close contact with someone who has a weakened immune system This is to lower the chances of infecting people at risk. For example, if you're having chemotherapy treatment, it's advisable that non-immune children close to you are given the chickenpox vaccine. The vaccine would also be recommended if you were about to start work in a radiotherapy department and had not had chickenpox before. Read more about who should have the chickenpox vaccine. How the chickenpox vaccine works The chickenpox vaccine is a live vaccine and contains a small amount of weakened chickenpox-causing virus. The vaccine stimulates your immune system to produce antibodies that will help protect against chickenpox. Read more about live vaccines. Read more about chickenpox vaccine side effects. How is the chickenpox vaccine given? The vaccine is given as two separate injections, usually into the upper arm, four to eight weeks apart. How effective is the chickenpox vaccine? It's been shown that 9 out of 10 children vaccinated with a single dose will develop immunity against chickenpox. Two doses are recommended, as this gives an even better immune response. The vaccination is not quite as effective after childhood. It's estimated that three-quarters of teenagers and adults who are vaccinated will become immune to chickenpox. If you are worried your child has a rash that could be chickenpox, take a look at this childhood rashes slideshow to see if the rash is a typical symptom of chickenpox or another childhood condition. Read answers to common questions about the chickenpox vaccine. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the baby rashes information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/baby_rashes_a_visual_guide.html Page last reviewed: 31\/03\/2016 Next review due: 31\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 57 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Chickenpox Chickenpox is a mild and common illness that most children catch at some point NHS Choices links NHS vaccination schedule Shingles External links Green Book: chickenpox vaccination  healthtalk.org: real immunisation stories Find your local GP Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Skin rashes in babies Most rashes in babies are harmless and clear on their own. Find out about the common causes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Children's flu vaccine","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/child-flu-vaccine.aspx","content":"Children's flu vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Children's flu vaccine The children's flu vaccine is offered as a yearly nasal spray to young children to protect them against flu. Flu can be a very unpleasant illness for children with potentially serious complications, including bronchitis and pneumonia. At what age should children have the nasal spray flu vaccine? In the autumn\/winter of 2016-17, the vaccine will be available free on the NHS for eligible children, including: children aged two, three and four on August 31 2016 \u2013 that is, children born between September 1 2011 and August 31 2014 children in school years one, two and three in some parts of the country, all primary school-aged children will be offered the vaccine as part of a test programme children aged 2 to 17 with long-term health conditions Over the next few years the programme will be extended gradually to include older children. Who will give the children's flu vaccination? Children aged two, three and four years will be given the vaccination at their general practice, usually by the practice nurse. Children in school years one, two and three are likely to have their vaccination in school. In some areas it may be offered in other community health settings. Children at high risk from flu Children aged 2 to 17 with long-term health conditions such as diabetes are at higher risk from flu. It's especially important that they are vaccinated with the annual flu nasal spray instead of the annual flu jab, which they were previously given. Children between the ages of six months and two years who are at high risk from flu are offered the annual flu jab, usually at their GP surgery. What are the side effects of the flu vaccine for children? The nasal spray flu vaccine has very few side effects \u2013 the main one is getting a runny nose after vaccination for a few days. Read more about the side effects of the flu vaccine for children. How to get the flu vaccine for your child Your child's GP or school should contact you about getting them vaccinated before the winter. Talk to the GP, practice nurse or your child's school nurse if you want more information about when and how your child will be vaccinated against flu. If you haven't heard from their GP by early November 2016, contact them directly to make an appointment. How is the nasal spray flu vaccine given? The vaccine is given as a single spray squirted up each nostril. Not only is it needle-free \u2013 a big advantage for children \u2013 the nasal spray is quick, painless, and works even better than the injected flu vaccine. The vaccine is absorbed very quickly. It will still work even if, after the vaccination, your child develops a runny nose, sneezes or blows their nose. Read the patient information leaflet for the nasal spray flu vaccine (PDF, 221kb). Are there any children who should delay having the nasal spray flu vaccine? Children should have their nasal spray flu vaccination delayed if they: have a runny or blocked nose are wheezy If a child has a heavily blocked or runny nose, it might stop the vaccine getting into their system. In this case, their flu vaccination should be postponed until their nasal symptoms have cleared up. If a child is wheezy or has been wheezy in the past week, their vaccination should be postponed until they have been wheeze-free for at least three days. Are there any children who should not have the nasal spray flu vaccine? There are a few children who should avoid the nasal spray flu vaccine. The vaccine is not recommended for children who have: a severely weakened immune system severe egg allergy severe asthma \u2013 that is, those being treated with steroid tablets or high-dose inhaled steroids an allergy to any of the vaccine ingredients, such as neomycin Children unable to have the nasal spray vaccine may be able to have the injectable flu vaccine instead. Why children are offered flu vaccine Flu is a very common infection in babies and children. It can be very unpleasant for them. Children with flu have the same symptoms as adults \u2013 including fever, chills, aching muscles, headache, stuffy nose, dry cough and a sore throat lasting up to a week. Some children develop a very high fever or complications of flu, such as bronchitis, pneumonia and a painful middle ear infection. They may need hospital treatment, and very occasionally a child may die from flu. In fact, healthy children under the age of five are more likely to have to be admitted to hospital with flu than any other age group. For children with long-term health conditions such as diabetes, asthma, heart disease or lung disease, getting flu can be very serious as they are more at risk of developing serious complications. Learn about the five reasons to vaccinate your child against flu (PDF, 461kb). Read more about the complications of flu. How safe is the flu vaccine for children? The flu vaccine for children has a good safety record. In the UK, millions of children have been vaccinated safely and successfully. How does the children's flu vaccine work? The vaccine contains live but weakened flu viruses that do not cause flu in children. It will help your child build up immunity to flu in a similar way as natural infection, but without the symptoms. Because the main flu viruses change each year, a new nasal spray vaccine has to be given each year, in the same way as the injectable flu vaccine. Stopping the spread of flu The nasal spray flu vaccine will not only help protect your child against flu, the infection will also be less able to spread from them to their family, carers and the wider population. Children spread flu because they generally don't use tissues properly or wash their hands. Vaccinating children also protects others that are vulnerable to flu, such as babies, older people, pregnant women and people with serious long-term illnesses. Read more about how flu is spread. How many doses of the flu vaccine do children need? Most children only need a single dose of the nasal spray. The patient information leaflet provided with the nasal spray suggests children should be given two doses of this vaccine if they've not had flu vaccine before. However, the NHS vaccination programme has advised that healthy children only need a single dose because a second dose of the vaccine provides little additional protection. Children aged two to nine years at risk of flu because of an underlying medical condition, who have not received flu vaccine before, should have two doses of the nasal spray given at least four weeks apart. Read answers to some of the common questions parents have about the flu vaccine for children. Page last reviewed: 10\/07\/2016 Next review due: 10\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 225 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful All about flu Find out more about flu, including how to treat it and how to stop it spreading NHS Choices links Common questions about vaccinations  The difference between colds and flu  External links NHS leaflet: flu vaccine for children 2016-17 (PDF, 440kb) NHS leaflet: five reasons to vaccinate your child against flu (PDF, 461kb) NHS leaflet: pre-school immunisations (PDF, 656kb) Reasons to have your child vaccinated Why it's good for your child and the whole community to be vaccinated, and the dangers of not doing so NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"DTaP\/IPV (pre-school) booster","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/4-in-1-pre-school-dtap-ipv-booster.aspx","content":"4-in-1 pre-school booster - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: 4-in-1 pre-school booster The 4-in-1 pre-school booster vaccine is offered to three-year-old children to boost their protection against four different serious diseases: diphtheria  tetanus  whooping cough polio Children are routinely vaccinated against these illnesses as babies by the 5-in-1 vaccine. The 4-in-1 pre-school booster vaccine increases their immunity even further. When should children have the 4-in-1 booster vaccine? The 4-in-1 booster vaccine is routinely offered to children at the age of three years and four months old.   How is the 4-in-1 vaccine given? It's injected into the child's upper arm. Can the 4-in-1 pre-school booster vaccine be given with other vaccines? The pre-school booster can be given at the same time as other vaccines. It's usually given at the same time as the second dose of the MMR vaccine. This NHS leaflet tells you more about pre-school immunisations (PDF, 835kb). How well does the 4-in-1 pre-school booster work? Studies have shown that the pre-school booster is very effective. In clinical tests, more than 99% of children who had been given the 4-in-1 pre-school booster were protected against tetanus, diphtheria, whooping cough and polio. The vaccine protects children from these infections until they receive their teenage 3-in-1 booster at the age of 14.  The 4-in-1 vaccine not only protects your child against these infections, but also stops them passing the germs on to babies who are too young to have had all of their vaccinations. How safe is the 4-in-1 booster vaccine? Before anyone can be given a vaccine, it has to go through many tests to check that it is safe and that it works. However, the 4-in-1 pre-school booster, like other vaccines, can have side effects in some children. Side effects of the 4-in-1 vaccine are usually mild. Your child may get a little redness, swelling or tenderness where the injection was given that will disappear on its own. This NHS leaflet tells you about common vaccination reactions in young children up to five years of age (PDF, 118kb). There are two different 4-in-1 vaccines that are used in the UK \u2013 Infanrix IPV and REPEVAX. Both vaccines provide good booster responses, so it doesn't matter which one your child is given as their pre-school booster.  Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for Infanrix IPV (PDF, 68kb). Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for REPEVAX (PDF, 30kb). Read more about the 4-in-1 pre-school booster side effects. Which children can't have the 4-in-1 booster vaccine? The vast majority of children can have the 4-in-1 booster vaccine, but there are a few children who shouldn't have it. They include children who: are allergic to the vaccine have a fever at the time of the vaccination appointment The vaccine should not be given to children who have had an anaphylactic reaction (severe allergic reaction) to any part of the vaccine before. There is no need to postpone vaccination if your child has a minor illness, such as a cough or a cold with no fever. But if your baby is ill with a fever, it's best to delay vaccination until they have recovered. Why is inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) used rather than oral polio vaccine (OPV), as in the past? Oral polio vaccine (OPV) was used from the 1960s because the live vaccine provided better community-wide protection against polio. Now that polio has been wiped out from large parts of the world, the risk of polio is so low that it is an appropriate time to switch to inactivated polio vaccine, which is given as an injection and does not carry the risk of paralytic polio. Can you get polio from the polio part of this vaccine? The 4-in-1 pre-school booster uses inactivated polio vaccine, which cannot cause polio.  Page last reviewed: 18\/05\/2016 Next review due: 18\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 76 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Whooping cough Find out about whooping cough, a highly contagious infection of the airways that can be serious in young children NHS Choices links Common questions about vaccination NHS vaccination schedule External links healthtalk.org: real-life vaccination stories from parents   NHS leaflet: common side effects after vaccination in babies and young children (PDF, 118kb) NHS leaflet: pre-school immunisations (PDF 835kb) Search for services Find a GP surgery in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"DTaP\/IPV\/Hib (5-in-1) vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/5-in-1-infant-DTaPIPVHib-vaccine.aspx","content":"5-in-1 infant DTaP\/IPV\/Hib vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: 5-in-1 vaccine The 5-in-1 vaccine is one of the first vaccines your baby will have. It's given as a single injection to protect your baby against five serious childhood diseases:  diphtheria  tetanus  whooping cough (pertussis)  polio  Hib (Haemophilus influenzae type b) When should babies have the 5-in-1 vaccine? The 5-in-1 vaccine is given three times \u2013 when babies are 8, 12 and 16 weeks old. Your baby needs three doses to make sure they develop strong immunity against the five diseases the vaccine protects against. Every time another dose of the vaccine is given, your baby's immune response increases. How is the 5-in-1 vaccine given? The vaccine is injected into your baby's thigh. How well does the 5-in-1 vaccine work? The 5-in-1 vaccine works well. It produces very good immunity to diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, Hib and polio infections. How safe is the 5-in-1 vaccine? The 5-in-1 vaccine is very safe. It's inactivated, which means it doesn't contain any live organisms, so there is no risk of your baby getting the diseases it protects against. The vaccine also has few side effects, although it's common for babies to be a little irritable afterwards. They may also have a short-lived small bump, redness and swelling at the injection site.  There are two 5-in-1 vaccines that are used in the UK. Either can be given to babies as part of the childhood vaccination programme. Their brand names are Pediacel and Infanrix IPV Hib. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for Pediacel (PDF, 37.43kb). Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for Infanrix IPV Hib (PDF, 66.7kb). Read more about 5-in-1 vaccine side effects. Can the 5-in-1 be given at the same time as other vaccines? It's safe for your baby to have the 5-in-1 vaccine at the same time as other vaccines, such as the rotavirus vaccine, pneumococcal vaccine and Men B vaccine. Which babies should not have the 5-in-1 infant vaccine? The vast majority of babies can have the 5-in-1 jab, but there are a few babies who should not have it. They include babies who: are allergic to the vaccine have a fever at the time of the vaccination appointment  have signs of a neurological problem that is getting worse, including poorly controlled epilepsy The vaccine should not be given to babies who have had an anaphylactic reaction (severe allergic reaction) to a previous dose of the vaccine, or a reaction to any part of the vaccine that may be present in trace amounts, such as neomycin, streptomycin or polymixin B. There is no need to postpone vaccination if your baby has a minor illness, such as a cough or a cold with no fever. But if your baby is ill with a fever, it's best to delay vaccination until they have recovered. Children who show signs of a neurological problem that is getting worse, including poorly controlled epilepsy, should have their vaccination postponed until they have been seen by a specialist. If your child has a history of febrile convulsions (fits) or has suffered a fit within 72 hours of a previous dose of the vaccine, speak to your GP, nurse or health visitor. They will advise you about what to do. What if I miss the 5-in-1 vaccination appointment? It's best for babies to be vaccinated at the recommended age, as they are then protected from serious diseases as early in life as possible. However, don't worry if your baby has missed an appointment for the 5-in-1 vaccination. It's never too late to have it. Make an appointment with your GP surgery or local child health clinic. Page last reviewed: 09\/05\/2016 Next review due: 09\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 129 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Vaccination calendar Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by NHS Choices links Diphtheria Hib Polio Tetanus   Whooping cough External links healthtalk.org: real stories NHS leaflet: baby vaccinations (PDF, 1.24Mb) What is whooping cough? (9 to 30 months) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Paediatrician Michellle Heys explains what whooping cough is, how to prevent it and what to do if your child has it. Media last reviewed: 23\/04\/2015 Next review due: 23\/04\/2017 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Hepatitis B vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/hepatitis-b-vaccine.aspx","content":"Hepatitis B vaccine Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccination isn't routinely available as part of the NHS vaccination schedule. It's only offered to those thought to be at increased risk of hepatitis B or its complications. The vaccine gives protection against the hepatitis B virus, which is a major cause of serious liver disease, including cirrhosis and liver cancer. Who should be vaccinated against hepatitis B? You can get infected with hepatitis B if you have contact with an infected person's blood or other body fluids. Babies born to mothers infected with hepatitis B are also at risk of becoming infected. People at risk of hepatitis B \u2013 and who should therefore consider vaccination \u2013 are: people who inject drugs or have a partner who injects drugs people who change their sexual partners frequently men who have sex with men babies born to infected mothers close family and sexual partners of someone with hepatitis B anyone who receives regular blood transfusions or blood products people with any form of liver disease people with chronic kidney disease people travelling to high-risk countries male and female sex workers people who work somewhere that places them at risk of contact with blood or body fluids, such as nurses, prison staff, doctors, dentists and laboratory staff prisoners families adopting or fostering children from high-risk countries How to get vaccinated against hepatitis B Ask your GP to vaccinate you, or visit any sexual health or genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic for the hepatitis B vaccination. Find your local genitourinary medicine clinic. If your job places you at risk of hepatitis B infection, it is your employer's responsibility to arrange vaccination for you, rather than your GP. Contact your occupational health department. What does hepatitis B immunisation involve? Full protection involves having three injections of hepatitis B vaccine over four to six months. If you're a healthcare worker or you have kidney failure, you will be followed up to see if you have responded to the vaccine. Anyone vaccinated by their own occupational health service can also request a blood test to see if they have responded to the vaccine. Five-year boosters are recommended for anyone thought to be at continuing risk of infection. Emergency hepatitis B vaccination If you've been exposed to the hepatitis B virus and have not been vaccinated before, you should seek medical advice immediately as you may benefit from the hepatitis B vaccine. In some situations, you may also need to have an injection of antibodies called specific hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) along with the hepatitis B vaccine. HBIG should ideally be given within 48 hours, but you can still have it up to a week after exposure. Babies and hepatitis B vaccination Pregnant women have a routine blood test for hepatitis B as part of their antenatal care. Babies born to mothers found to be infected with hepatitis B need to be given a dose of the hepatitis B vaccine within 24 hours of their birth, followed by further doses at 1, 2 and 12 months old. Babies of mothers identified by the blood test as particularly infectious might also receive an injection of HBIG at birth on top of the hepatitis B vaccination to give them rapid protection against infection. All babies born to mothers infected with hepatitis B should be tested at 12 months old to check if they have become infected with the virus. Hepatitis B vaccination in pregnancy Hepatitis B infection in pregnant women may result in severe disease for the mother and chronic infection for the baby, so it's advised that a pregnant woman should have the hepatitis B vaccine if she is in a high-risk category. There is no evidence of any risk from vaccinating pregnant or breastfeeding women against hepatitis B. And since it's an inactivated (killed) vaccine, the risk to the unborn baby is likely to be negligible. Hepatitis B vaccine on the NHS Hospitals, GP surgeries and sexual health or GUM clinics usually provide the hepatitis B vaccination free of charge for anyone at risk of infection. GPs are not obliged to provide the hepatitis B vaccine on the NHS if you're not thought to be at risk. GPs may charge for the hepatitis B vaccine if you want it as a travel vaccine, or they may refer you to a travel clinic so you can get vaccinated privately. The current cost of the vaccine (in 2015) is around £40 a dose. How safe is the hepatitis B vaccine? The hepatitis B vaccine is very safe. Other than some redness and soreness at the site of the injection, side effects are rare. It is an inactivated (killed) vaccine, so it cannot cause the disease itself. Read more about vaccine safety and side effects. Page last reviewed: 30\/11\/2015 Next review due: 30\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 199 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Hepatitis B Find out about hepatitis B, an infection of the liver that's spread through blood and body fluids Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against External links British Liver Trust: hepatitis B Hepatitis B: the green book Search for services Find and compare services Services Drug misuse - support for family and friends Drug treatment services Genito-Urinary Medicine GP Information and support for drug misuse Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Drugs How drugs affect you, real-life stories of addiction, where to get help, plus videos on substance abuse Healthcare for gay men, lesbians and bisexuals Healthcare for gay, lesbian and bisexual people, including mental and sexual health and screening How safe is sex? The risks of getting sexually transmitted infections through various sex activities, including oral and anal sex NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Hib\/Men C booster","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/hib-men-C-booster-vaccine.aspx","content":"Hib\/Meningitis C booster vaccine - vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Hib\/Men C vaccine The Hib\/Men C vaccine is a single injection given to one-year-old babies to boost their protection against Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) and meningitis C. Hib and meningitis C infections are serious and potentially fatal. They can both cause meningitis and septicaemia (blood poisoning). Who should have the Hib\/Men C vaccine? The Hib\/Men C vaccine is offered to all babies when they are one-year-old as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. Read more about when your baby should have the Hib\/Men C vaccine. Why is the Hib\/Men C vaccine needed? The vaccine boosts the protection your baby has already gained from their first course of Hib vaccine which they received in the 5-in-1 vaccine at 8, 12 and 16 weeks old, and begins their protection against meningitis C.  How safe is the Hib\/Men C vaccine? The Hib\/Men C vaccine is very safe. It's inactivated which means it doesn't contain any live organisms so there is no risk of your baby catching the diseases against which it protects. The vaccine also has few side effects. The brand name of the Hib\/Men C vaccine given in the UK is Menitorix. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for Menitorix (PDF, 104kb). Read more about the Hib\/Men C vaccine side effects. How effective is the Hib\/Men C vaccine? The Hib\/Men C booster is highly effective and protects children when they are most vulnerable to these diseases. Rates of Hib and Men C disease in the UK are now at their lowest-ever levels as a result of vaccination. How does the Hib\/Men C vaccine work? The Hib\/Men C vaccine contains bits of the bacteria that cause the diseases it protects against. If your child comes into contact with these germs, the antibodies their body produces after vaccination will fight the infection to stop the disease taking hold. Read answers to parents' common questions about the Hib\/Men C vaccine. Page last reviewed: 18\/04\/2016 Next review due: 18\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 41 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Haemophilus influenzae type b Hib is a bacterium that can cause a number of serious infections. These infections are rare nowadays as they can be prevented with routine vaccination Learn to recognise meningitis This symptom alert shows the signs and includes a printable checklist Search for services Find and compare services Services Breasfeeding support services Family activities GP Parenting information and support services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"HPV vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/hpv-human-papillomavirus-vaccine.aspx","content":"Human papilloma virus (HPV) cervical cancer vaccine - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: HPV vaccine All girls aged 12 to 13 are offered HPV (human papilloma virus) vaccination as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. The vaccine protects against cervical cancer. It's usually given to girls in year eight at schools in England. According to Cancer Research UK, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in women under the age of 35. In the UK, 2,900 women a year are diagnosed with cervical cancer, that's around eight women every day. Around 970 women died from cervical cancer in 2011 in the UK. It's estimated that about 400 lives could be saved every year in the UK as a result of vaccinating girls before they are infected with HPV. The HPV vaccine is delivered largely through secondary schools, and consists of two injections into the upper arm spaced at least six, and not more than 24 months apart (girls who began vaccination before September 2014 receive three injections). What is HPV? The human papilloma virus (HPV) is the name given to a family of viruses. Different types of HPV are classed as either high risk or low risk, depending on the conditions they can cause. For instance, some types of HPV can cause warts or verrucas. Other types are associated with cervical cancer. In 99% of cases, cervical cancer occurs as a result of a history of infection with high-risk types of HPV. Often, infection with the HPV causes no symptoms.  Read more about HPV. Different types of HPV and what they do There are over 100 different types of HPV, with around 40 types that affect the genital area. Infection with some high-risk types of HPV can cause abnormal tissue growth as well as other cell changes that can lead to cervical cancer. Infection with other types of HPV may cause: genital warts: small growths or skin changes on or around the genital or anal area, these are the most common viral sexually transmitted infection (STI) in the UK skin warts and verrucas vaginal cancer or vulval cancer (although these types of cancer are rare) anal cancer or cancer of the penis some cancers of the head and neck laryngeal papillomas (warts on the voice box or vocal cords) For more information see Why is the HPV vaccine needed? How the HPV vaccine helps A vaccine called Gardasil is used in the national NHS cervical cancer vaccination programme. Gardasil protects against the two types of HPV, between them responsible for more than 70% of cervical cancers in the UK. A bonus of using Gardasil to prevent cervical cancer is that it prevents genital warts too. Which girls should have the HPV vaccination? The HPV vaccine is part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme and is routinely offered to secondary school girls aged 12 and 13. It's a safe vaccine and there are very few girls who aren't suitable for HPV vaccination. However, special precautions may need to be taken for girls with certain health conditions, or who have ever had a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). Read more about who should have the HPV vaccine. Why is the HPV vaccine given at such a young age? The HPV virus is very common and is easily spread by sexual activity. As much as half the population will be infected at some time in their life. In most cases, the virus doesn't do any harm because your immune system gets rid of the infection. But in some cases, the infection persists and can lead to health problems. Although most girls don't start having sex until after they're 16 years of age, it's important that they are protected against HPV infection early enough and a good time is in the early teenage years. Getting the vaccine as early as possible will protect them in the future. Read more about how to prevent HPV infection. How is the HPV vaccine given? The HPV vaccine is currently given as a series of two injections within a six- to 24-month period. Girls who began their course of HPV vaccination before September 2014 receive three injections. Learn more about how the HPV vaccine is given. How long does the HPV vaccine protect for? Studies have already shown that the vaccine protects against HPV infection for around 10 years, although experts expect protection to be for much longer. Can girls who missed HPV vaccination still have it? Yes, if a girl misses either of her HPV vaccinations, for whatever reason, speak to her nurse or doctor about making another appointment, ideally as close as possible to the original one. Girls can have the HPV vaccination on the NHS up to age of 18. Girls who have the HPV vaccination after the age of 15 will need three doses as the response to two doses is not so good in older girls. Cervical screening and the HPV vaccine Cervical screening is a way of picking up abnormal cells in the cervix before they progress to cancer. It's been shown that early detection and treatment of cervical abnormalities picked up by screening can prevent three-quarters of cervical cancers. The NHS cervical screening programme involves checking women between the ages of 25 and 64 every three to five years for early cervical abnormalities. Regular cervical screening is the best way to identify abnormal cell changes in the cervix. So it's important that all girls who receive the HPV vaccine also have regular cervical screening once they reach the age of 25. Now, read why it's so important for 12-13 year-old girls to receive the HPV vaccination and find out more about the safety of the HPV vaccine. There is general information about the HPV vaccine in this NHS leaflet. Read more about how to prevent HPV infection. Read more about how to test for HPV infection. Find out how HPV infection is treated. Page last reviewed: 24\/09\/2014 Next review due: 24\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 229 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful NHS Choices links NHS vaccination schedule Common questions about vaccination Cervical cancer Cervical screening Genital warts External links NHS leaflet: HPV vaccination (PDF, 273kb) NHS leaflet: immunisations at secondary school (PDF, 419kb) Cancer Research UK: HPV vaccines healthtalk.org: the HPV vaccination programme Macmillan: HPV vaccine  DH Green Book: the HPV vaccine Jo's Cervical Cancer Trust Search for services Find and compare services Services GP Paediatrics services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress Cervical cancer Cervical cancer is an uncommon type of cancer that develops in the cervix (entrance to the womb) Teen girls 15-18 Read about teen girl health issues, including healthy eating, skin problems and having sex for the first time NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Men B vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/meningitis-B-vaccine.aspx","content":"Men B vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS CHoices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Men B vaccine The Men B vaccine is recommended for babies aged 8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year as part of the NHS routine childhood vaccination programme. The Men B vaccine will protect your baby against infection by meningococcal group B bacteria, which are responsible for more than 90% of meningococcal infections in young children. Meningococcal infections can be very serious, causing meningitis and septicaemia (blood poisoning), which can lead to severe brain damage, amputations and, in some cases, death. The Men B vaccine used is called Bexsero.  England was the first country in the world to offer a national, routine and publicly funded Men B vaccination programme using the Bexsero vaccine. When should babies should have the Men B vaccine? The Men B vaccine is offered to babies alongside their other routine vaccinations at: 8 weeks 16 weeks One year  How is the Men B vaccine given? The vaccine is given as a single injection into the baby's thigh. How to get the Men B vaccine Your doctor's surgery or clinic will automatically send you an appointment for you to bring your baby for their Men B vaccination alongside their other routine vaccinations. Most surgeries and health centres run special immunisation or baby clinics. If you can't get to the clinic, contact the surgery to make another appointment. Find out when your baby should have the Men B vaccine. Men B vaccine safety Like all vaccines, the Men B vaccine can cause side effects, but studies suggest they are generally mild and don't last long. Almost 8,000 people, including more than 5,000 babies and toddlers, have had the Men B vaccine during clinical trials to test its safety. Since the vaccine was licensed, almost a million doses have been given, with no safety concerns identified. Read the patient information leaflet for Bexsero. Can the Men B vaccine be given at the same time as other vaccines? The Men B vaccine can be given at the same time as other routine baby vaccinations, such as the 5-in-1 vaccine and pneumococcal vaccine. Can vaccines overload a baby's immune system? Men B vaccine and fever Babies given the Men B vaccine alongside their other routine vaccinations at 8 and 16 weeks are likely to develop fever within the first 24 hours after vaccination. It's important that you give your baby liquid paracetamol following vaccination to reduce the risk of fever. Your nurse will give you more information about paracetamol at your vaccination appointment. Other common side effects include irritability and redness and tenderness at the injection site. The liquid paracetamol will also help with these symptoms. Read this NHS leaflet on how to use paracetamol to prevent and treat fever after Men B vaccination. Read more about possible Men B vaccine side effects. Meningitis B is a killer Meningococcal group B bacteria is a serious cause of life-threatening infections, including meningitis and blood poisoning, worldwide and the leading infectious killer of babies and young children in the UK. There are 12 known groups of meningococcal bacteria, and group B (Men B) is responsible for about 90% of meningococcal infections in the UK. Meningitis and septicaemia caused by meningococcal group B bacteria can affect people of any age, but is most common in babies and young children. Meningococcal infections tend to come in bursts. In the past 20 years, between 500 and 1,700 people every year, mainly babies and young children, have suffered from Men B disease, with around 1 in 10 dying from the infection. Many of those who survive suffer terrible permanent disability, such as amputation, brain damage and epilepsy. Read more about meningitis. Men B vaccine protection There are hundreds of different strains of meningococcal group B bacteria around the world, and some tests predict that the Bexsero Men B vaccine protects against almost 90% of the ones circulating in England. However, it's not yet clear how this will relate to lives saved or cases prevented. How the Men B vaccine works The Men B vaccine is made from three major proteins found on the surface of most meningococcal bacteria, combined with the outer membrane of one Men B strain. Together, these constituents stimulate the immune system to protect against future exposures to meningococcal bacteria. For more detail on the ingredients of the Men B vaccine, read the patient information leaflet for Bexsero. Read more about vaccine ingredients. Different types of meningitis vaccines There are two other vaccines against common strains of meningococcal disease \u2013 the Men ACWY vaccine (against meningococcal groups A, C, W and Y) which is offered on the NHS to 14-year-olds and first-time students and the Hib\/Men C vaccine (against Haemophilus influenza type B and meningococcal group C) for babies at one year old. Read about the benefits of childhood vaccinations. Page last reviewed: 26\/06\/2015 Next review due: 26\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 138 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Vaccination calendar Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by The Men ACWY vaccine The Men ACWY vaccine is recommended on the NHS for young teenagers, sixth formers and new university students NHS Choices links Childhood illness  Meningitis Septicaemia  External links DH Green Book: meningococcal disease (PDF, 369kb)    NHS leaflet: how to protect your baby against Men B disease (PDF, 400kb)  NHS leaflet: baby vaccinations up to 12 months (PDF, 1.24MB) Meningitis Research Foundation Meningitis Now Meningitis Find out about meningitis, an infection of the brain's protective membranes that often affects babies and children NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Men C vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/men-c-vaccine.aspx","content":"Meningitis C vaccine - vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Men C vaccine - discontinued July 1 2016 From July 1 2016, the Men C vaccine for 12 week-old babies will be discontinued from the NHS childhood vaccination programme. The success of the Men C vaccination programme means there are almost no cases of Men C disease in babies or young children on the UK any longer. The dose of Men C vaccine that used to be offered to babies at 12 weeks of age has therefore been removed from the vaccination schedule. All children will continue to be offered the Hib\/Men C vaccine at one year of age, and the Men ACWY vaccine at 14 years of age to provide protection across all age groups. This PHE leaflet has more information about the changes to the Men C vaccination programme (PDF, 280kb). Page last reviewed: 27\/06\/2016 Next review due: 27\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 97 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Hib\/Men C vaccine Which babies should have the Hib\/Men C vaccine, why and when NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Men W vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/men-acwy-vaccine.aspx","content":"Men W vaccine Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Men ACWY vaccine Young teenagers and 'fresher' students going to university for the first time are advised to have a vaccination to prevent meningitis W disease. The Men ACWY vaccine is given by a single injection into the upper arm and protects against four different causes of meningitis and septicaemia \u2013 meningococcal (Men) A, C, W and Y diseases. There are two Men ACWY vaccines called Nimenrix and Menveo. They are very similar and both work equally well. Read the patient information leaflet for Nimenrix. Read the patient information leaflet for Menveo. At what age should teenagers and young people have the vaccine? The Men ACWY vaccination programme is being delivered to teenagers and first-time students in a carefully planned programme over the next three years. The priority is to vaccinate all teenagers from school year 9 onwards before they complete school year 13. There is also a catch-up vaccination programme for first-time students up to the age of 25. Schoolchildren: Children aged 14 (school year 9) will be offered the Men ACWY vaccine in school as part of the routine adolescent schools programme alongside the 3-in-1 teenage booster, and as a direct replacement for the Men C vaccination. University students: Students going to university or college for the first time, including overseas and mature students up to the age of 25, should contact their GP to have the Men ACWY vaccine, ideally before the start of or in the first few weeks of the academic year. Why teenagers and students should have the Men ACWY vaccination Cases of meningitis and septicaemia (blood poisoning) caused by Men W bacteria are rising, due to a particularly deadly strain. Older teenagers and university students are at high risk of infection because many of them mix closely with lots of new people, some of whom may unknowingly carry the meningococcal bacteria. The highest risk of meningitis is in the first year of university, particularly the first few months. As the Men ACWY vaccine is being targeted at those at highest risk, students in their second year or above of university are not included in this vaccination programme. The dangers of Men W disease Cases of meningitis and septicaemia due to Men W have been increasing in England, from 22 cases in 2009 to 117 in 2014. The increase seems to be speeding up in 2015, caused by an aggressive strain of the bug. With early diagnosis and antibiotic treatment, most people with meningococcal disease make a full recovery. But it's fatal in about 1 in 10 cases and can lead to long-term health problems, such as amputation, deafness, epilepsy and learning difficulties. Men W infections are particularly severe and usually need to be treated in intensive care. They have a higher death rate than the more common Men C and Men B strains. The Men ACWY vaccine has previously been recommended only for people at increased risk of meningococcal disease, including people with no spleen or a spleen that doesn\u2019t work properly, for Hajj pilgrims, and for travellers to countries with high rates of meningococcal disease, including parts of Africa and Latin America. More about Men ACWY as a travel vaccine. Men ACWY vaccine effectiveness The Men ACWY vaccine provides good protection against serious infections caused by four different meningococcal groups (A, C, W and Y) including meningitis and septicaemia. The vaccine only contains the sugar coating on the surface of the four groups of meningococcal bacteria and works by triggering the body\u2019s immune system to develop antibodies against the sugar coating without causing disease. Read more about vaccine ingredients. Men ACWY vaccine side effects Like all vaccines, the Men ACWY vaccine can cause side effects, but studies suggest they are generally mild and soon settle. The most common side effects seen in teenagers and young people who receive the vaccine are redness, hardening and itching at the injection site, fever, headache, nausea and fatigue. Who should not have the Men ACWY vaccine? You should not have the Men ACWY vaccine if you are allergic to the vaccine or any of its ingredients. You can find out the vaccine ingredients in the patient information leaflets for Nimenrix and Menveo. You should also check with the doctor or nurse before having the Men ACWY vaccine if you: have a bleeding problem, such as haemophilia, or bruise easily have a high temperature are pregnant or breastfeeding How is meningitis W spread? Meningococcal disease is caused by a bacterium called Neisseria meningitidis (also called the meningococcus). These bacteria can be divided into 13 different groups, of which five (A, B, C, W and Y) are responsible for nearly all serious meningococcal infections. The meningococcal bacteria live in the back of the nose and throat in about 1 in 10 of the population without causing any illness. The bacteria is spread from person to person by close prolonged contact with a person carrying the bacteria, such as coughing, kissing and sneezing. Very occasionally, the meningococcal bacteria can cause serious illness, including meningitis and septicaemia. Meningococcal infections can strike at any age, but babies, young children and teenagers are especially vulnerable. Read more about how meningitis bugs are spread. Men W cases on the increase In England, most meningococcal infections are caused by group B (Men B). Men C, Men W and Men Y are usually responsible for only 10-20% of cases. Although the total number of meningococcal cases in England has been falling since the early 2000s, Men W infections have increased from only 22 cases in 2009 to 117 in 2014. Currently, Men W alone accounts for almost a quarter of all meningococcal infections in England. From 2009 to 2012, an average of four people died of meningitis W each year. Most of the people who died were elderly. But during 2013 and 2014, there were 24 deaths from Men W disease including, for the first time in over a decade, babies and toddlers. Read more about meningitis and septicaemia. Babies, older people and Men W vaccine Only teenagers and young people will be vaccinated against Men W as part of the new vaccination programme. This is so they will be directly protected by the Men ACWY vaccine at a time when they're at increased risk (entering colleges and universities, where they will be socialising more). Vaccinating teenagers against Men W should have the added benefit of indirectly protecting other age groups, including unvaccinated babies, children and older people. This is because teenagers are the age group most likely to carry the meningococcal bacteria at the back of their noses. Vaccinating teenagers will reduce the number of carriers, and therefore spread of the Men W bug, both within their social circles and also to other age groups. How to spot meningitis and septicaemia Men W disease, like all meningococcal infections, can come on suddenly and progress quickly. All meningococcal infections can cause meningitis and septicaemia, but Men W can also cause other illnesses, such as pneumonia and joint infections (septic arthritis). Early symptoms of meningococcal disease include: headache vomiting muscle pain fever cold hands and feet A rash of tiny red pinpricks may also develop once septicaemia has set in. You can tell this is a meningitis rash if it doesn\u2019t fade under pressure \u2013 for instance, when gently pressing a glass against it (the \"glass test\"). If you, or a child or adult you know, has these symptoms, seek urgent medical advice. Don\u2019t wait for a rash to develop. Early diagnosis and treatment with antibiotics are vital. Here\u2019s more info on the symptoms of meningitis and the treatment of meningitis. Other meningitis vaccines The Hib\/Men C vaccine is offered as part of the NHS vaccination programme to all babies aged 12 months old. The Men B vaccine (Bexsero) is offered as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme, to all babies aged 2, 4 and 12 months old. Read this NHS leaflet (PDF, 481kb) which gives information about the Men ACWY vaccine for pupils in school years 9 to 13. Read this NHS leaflet (PDF, 949kb) which gives information about the Men ACWY vaccine for new university entrants. Page last reviewed: 19\/03\/2015 Next review due: 19\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 205 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful NHS Choices links Meningitis Septicaemia  External links Meningitis Research Foundation: Men W Meningitis Now: Men ACWY vaccine NHS leaflet: Men ACWY vaccine info for pupils in years 9 to 13 (PDF, 481kb)   NHS leaflet: Men ACWY vaccine info for new university students (PDF, 949kb) NHS leaflet: vaccinations for young people (PDF, 491kb) When to have your vaccinations Find out which vaccinations are routinely offered on the NHS and at what age they are needed Men B vaccine A new Men B vaccine called Bexsero is available on the NHS for babies aged 8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year old 3-in-1 teenage booster All about the 3-in-1 teenage booster jab, which can help protect against tetanus, diphtheria and polio NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"MMR","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/mmr-vaccine.aspx","content":"About the MMR vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: MMR vaccine MMR is a safe and effective combined vaccine that protects against three separate illnesses \u2013 measles, mumps and rubella (German measles) \u2013 in a single injection. The full course of MMR vaccination requires two doses. Measles, mumps and rubella are highly infectious conditions that can have serious, and potentially fatal, complications, including meningitis, swelling of the brain (encephalitis) and deafness. They can also lead to complications in pregnancy that affect the unborn baby, and can lead to miscarriage.  Since the MMR vaccine was introduced in 1988, it's rare for children in the UK to develop these serious conditions. However, outbreaks happen and there have been cases of measles in recent years, so it's important to ensure that you and your children are up-to-date with the MMR vaccination. This NHS leaflet tells you about MMR vaccination. MMR vaccine for babies and preschoolers The MMR vaccine is given on the NHS as a single injection to babies as part of their routine vaccination schedule, usually within a month of their first birthday. They will then have a second injection of the vaccine before starting school, usually at three years and four months. The MMR vaccine can sometimes be given to babies from six months of age if they may have been exposed to the measles virus, or during a measles outbreak.   Babies under six months old are not routinely given the MMR vaccine. This is because the antibodies to measles, mumps and rubella passed from mother to baby at the time of birth are retained and can work against the vaccine, meaning that the vaccine is not usually effective. These maternal antibodies decline with age and are almost all gone by the time MMR is normally given \u2013 around the age of one. MMR vaccination is recommended for six- to nine-month-old babies if they are at high risk of becoming infected in certain circumstances, such as during a measles outbreak. However, these children may not have enough protection from this early dose, so they will still need the standard MMR doses at 12-13 months and 40 months of age. The MMR vaccine is given as a single injection into the muscle of the thigh or upper arm. Find out which children and adults should have the MMR vaccine. Watch these healthtalk.org videos where parents weigh up the risks and benefits of MMR vaccination. MMR for older children Children up to the age of 18 who missed, or only partially completed, their earlier MMR vaccination can have a \"catch-up\" MMR vaccination on the NHS.   If you know or suspect your child hasn't been fully immunised, arrange with your GP for them to have a catch-up MMR vaccination. MMR for women planning pregnancy If you're thinking about getting pregnant, it's a good idea to check that you are fully protected against measles, mumps and rubella. Rubella infection in pregnancy can lead to serious birth defects and miscarriage. If you're not sure whether you've had two doses of the MMR vaccine, ask your GP practice to check.  If you haven't had both doses or there's no record available, you can have the vaccinations at your GP practice. You should avoid becoming pregnant for one month after having MMR vaccination. Be aware that the MMR vaccine is not suitable for women who are already pregnant. MMR for non-immune adults The MMR vaccine can also be given on the NHS to adults who may need it, including people born from 1970-79 who may have only been vaccinated against measles, as well as those born from 1980-90 who may not be protected against mumps. Check with your GP if you're not sure whether you've had the MMR vaccine. If in doubt, go ahead and have it. Even if you've had it before, it won't harm you to have a second, or even third, course of the vaccination. Read more about when the MMR vaccine is needed. Find out why some teenagers should have the MMR vaccination. Get advice on how to protect yourself and your family if there's a measles outbreak. Read the NHS leaflet: measles not just a kids' problem (PDF, 868kb) How the MMR vaccine works The MMR vaccine contains weakened versions of live measles, mumps and rubella viruses. The vaccine works by triggering the immune system to produce antibodies against measles, mumps and rubella. If you or your child then comes into contact with one of the diseases, the immune system will recognise it and immediately produce the antibodies needed to fight it. It's not possible for people who have recently had the MMR vaccine to infect other people. The MMR vaccine given in the UK is known under the brand names Priorix, or M-M-RVAXPRO. Read the patient information leaflet for Priorix (PDF, 124kb). Read the patient information leaflet for M-M-RVAXPRO (PDF, 104kb). Does the MMR vaccine cause autism? There has been some controversy about whether the MMR vaccine might cause autism, following a 1998 study by Dr Andrew Wakefield. In his paper, published in The Lancet, Dr Wakefield claimed there is a link between the MMR vaccine and autism or bowel disease. However, Andrew Wakefield's work has since been completely discredited and he has been struck off as a doctor in the UK. Subsequent studies in the last eight years have found no link between the MMR vaccine and autism or bowel disease. Watch healthtalk.org videos where parents discuss their worries about the MMR vaccine. Single measles, mumps and rubella vaccines Single vaccines are not available on the NHS in the UK because there is a risk that fewer children would receive all the necessary injections, increasing the levels of measles, mumps and rubella in the country. The delay in having six separate injections would also put more children at risk of developing the conditions, as well as increasing the amount of work and inconvenience for parents and those administering the vaccines.  Side effects of the MMR vaccine As there are three separate vaccines within a single injection, different side effects can occur at different times. The side effects of the MMR vaccine are usually mild. It's important to remember that they're milder than the potential complications of measles, mumps and rubella. Side effects include: developing a mild form of measles that lasts for two to three days \u2013 this is not infectious  developing a mild form of mumps that lasts for a day or two \u2013 this is not infectious In rare cases, a small rash of bruise-like spots may appear a few weeks after the injection. See your GP if you notice this kind of rash, or if you have any concerns about your child's symptoms after having the MMR jab. Find out how the MMR jab is given. This NHS leaflet tells you about the common vaccination reactions in babies and young children up to the age of five years. Read the answers to other common questions about the MMR vaccine. Page last reviewed: 04\/08\/2015 Next review due: 04\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 608 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 374  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Measles Measles is a highly infectious viral illness now rare in the UK as a result of the MMR jab Rubella Children are immunised against rubella as part of the routine childhood immunisation programme Mumps Mumps is a contagious viral infection that used to be common in children Is vaccination safe? The safety checks done on vaccines before and after their introduction Vaccine ingredients Gelatin, eggs, formaldehyde and thiomersal are all found in some vaccines \u2013 how safe are they? How vaccination saves lives How vaccination has saved lives and prevented disability in millions of people around the world Skin rashes in babies Most rashes in babies are harmless and clear on their own. Find out about the common causes MMR: translated information The NHS has produced information about the MMR vaccine in 11 languages: Information on MMR in Arabic (PDF, 123kb) Information on MMR in Bengali (PDF, 48kb) Information on MMR in Chinese (PDF, 175kb) Information on MMR in Gujarati (PDF, 68kb) Information on MMR in Italian (PDF, 146kb) Information on MMR in Polish (PDF, 166kb) Information on MMR in Portuguese (PDF, 72kb) Information on MMR in Punjabi (PDF, 67kb) Information on MMR in Somali (PDF, 162kb) Information on MMR in Turkish (PDF, 86kb) Information on MMR in Urdu (PDF, 409kb) NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pneumococcal vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/pneumococcal-vaccination.aspx","content":"Pneumococcal vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Pneumococcal vaccine The pneumococcal vaccine protects against serious and potentially fatal pneumococcal infections. It's also known as the \"pneumo jab\" or pneumonia vaccine. Pneumococcal infections are caused by the bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae and can lead to pneumonia, septicaemia (a kind of blood poisoning) and meningitis. At their worst, they can cause permanent brain damage, or even kill. This page covers: Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine How often is the pneumococcal vaccine given The different types of pneumococcal vaccine How the pneumococcal vaccine works Who shouldn't have the pneumococcal vaccine Side effects of the pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? A pneumococcal infection can affect anyone. However, some people are at higher risk of serious illness and can be given the pneumococcal vaccination on the NHS. These include: babies  adults aged 65 or over children and adults with certain long-term health conditions, such as a serious heart or kidney condition Read more about who should have the pneumo jab. How often is the pneumococcal vaccine given? Babies receive the pneumococcal vaccine as three separate injections, at 8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year old. People over 65 only need a single pneumococcal vaccination, which will protect for life. It is not given annually like the flu jab. People with a long-term health condition may need just a single one-off pneumococcal vaccination or five-yearly vaccination, depending on their underlying health problem. The different types of pneumonia vaccine The type of pneumococcal vaccine you are given depends on your age and health. The two types are: pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) \u2013 this is used to vaccinate children under two years old as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. It's known by the brand name Prevenar 13. Read the patient information leaflet for Prevenar 13. pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV) \u2013 this is given to people aged 65 and over, and to people at high risk due to long-term health conditions. Read the patient information leaflet for PPV.  Children at risk of pneumococcal infections can have the PPV vaccine from the age of two years onwards. It's thought not to work in children under the age of two.  How the pneumococcal vaccine works Both types of pneumococcal vaccine encourage your body to produce antibodies against pneumococcal bacteria. Antibodies are proteins produced by the body to neutralise or destroy disease-carrying organisms and toxins. They protect you from becoming ill if you are infected with the bacteria. More than 90 different strains of the pneumococcal bacterium have been identified, though only 8 to 10 of them cause the most serious infections. The childhood vaccine (PCV) protects against 13 strains of the pneumococcal bacterium, while the adult vaccine (PPV) protects against 23 strains. The pneumococcal vaccine is thought to be around 50-70% effective at preventing pneumococcal disease. Both the PPV and the PCV are inactivated or \"killed\" vaccines and do not contain any live organisms. They cannot cause the disease against which they protect.  Read more about killed vaccines. Who shouldn't have the pneumo jab? Occasionally, you or your child may need to delay having the vaccination or avoid it completely because of the following: Vaccine allergy Tell your GP if you or your child has had a bad reaction to any vaccination in the past. If there's been a confirmed severe allergic reaction, called an anaphylactic reaction, to the pneumococcal vaccine or any ingredient in the vaccine, it's best to avoid having it. However, if it was only a mild reaction, such as a rash, it is generally safe to have the vaccine. Fever at the vaccination appointment If you or your child are mildly unwell at the time of the vaccination, it's safe to have the vaccine. However, if you or your child are more seriously ill \u2013 for example, with a high temperature \u2013 it's best to delay the vaccination until after recovery.  Pregnancy and breastfeeding It's thought to be safe to have the pneumococcal vaccine during pregnancy and while you're breastfeeding. But, as a precaution, if you are pregnant, you may want to wait until you have had your baby (unless the benefits of having the vaccine outweigh the risks to your child). Side effects of the pneumococcal vaccine Like most vaccines, the childhood and adult versions of the pneumococcal vaccine can sometimes cause mild side effects, including: a mild fever redness at the site of the injection hardness or swelling at the site of the injection There are no serious side effects listed for either the childhood or adult versions of the vaccine, apart from an extremely small risk of serious allergic reaction. Read about the side effects of the pneumococcal vaccination. This video tells the story of 11-year-old Sam, who had pneumococcal meningitis as a baby (before the childhood pneumococcal vaccine was introduced) and was left severely brain damaged. Page last reviewed: 29\/02\/2016 Next review due: 28\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 519 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 292  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Pneumococcal infections Pneumococcal infections are caused by the S. pneumoniae bacterium. Find out who's at risk and which vaccinations are available Protect your child against measles Find out more about the MMR jab NHS Choices links Pneumonia Meningitis Blood poisoning Pneumococcal vaccination - Clinical trials External links NHS leaflet: baby vaccinations up to 12 months (PDF, 1.24MB)  Search for services Find and compare services Services GP Parenting information and support services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Seasonal flu jab","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/flu-influenza-vaccine.aspx","content":"Flu vaccine for adults - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: The flu jab Flu vaccination is available every year on the NHS to help protect adults and children at risk of flu and its complications. Flu can be unpleasant, but if you are otherwise healthy it will usually clear up on its own within a week. However, flu can be more severe in certain people, such as: anyone aged 65 and over pregnant women children and adults with an underlying health condition (particularly long-term heart or respiratory disease) children and adults with weakened immune systems Anyone in these risk groups is more likely to develop potentially serious complications of flu, such as pneumonia (a lung infection), so it's recommended that they have a flu vaccine every year to protect them.  The injected flu vaccine is offered free on the NHS annually to: adults over the age of 18 at risk of flu (including everyone aged 65 and over) pregnant women  children aged six months to two years at risk of flu Find out more about who should have the flu jab. Flu nasal spray vaccination The flu vaccine is routinely given on the NHS as an annual nasal spray to: children aged two, three and four years old plus children in school years one, two and three.  children aged two to 17 years at a particular risk of flu Read more about the flu nasal spray for children. 65 and overs and the flu jab You are eligible for the flu vaccine this year (2016-17) if you will be aged 65 and over on March 31 2017 \u2013 that is, you were born on or before March 31 1952. So, if you are currently 64 but will be 65 on March 31 2017, you do qualify. Where to get the flu jab You can have your NHS flu jab at: your GP surgery a local pharmacy offering the service your midwifery service if they offer it for pregnant women Some community pharmacies now offer flu vaccination to adults (but not children) at risk of flu including pregnant women, people aged 65 and over, people with long-term health conditions and carers. If you have your flu jab at a pharmacy, you don't have to inform your GP \u2013 it is up to the pharmacist to do that. How effective is the flu jab? Flu vaccine is the best protection we have against an unpredictable virus that can cause unpleasant illness in children and severe illness and death among at-risk groups, including older people, pregnant women and those with an underlying medical health condition. Studies have shown that the flu jab does work and will help prevent you getting the flu. It won't stop all flu viruses and the level of protection may vary between people, so it's not a 100% guarantee that you'll be flu-free, but if you do get flu after vaccination it's likely to be milder and shorter-lived than it would otherwise have been. There is also evidence to suggest that the flu jab can reduce your risk of having a stroke. Over time, protection from the injected flu vaccine gradually decreases and flu strains often change. So new flu vaccines are produced each year which is why people advised to have the flu jab need it every year too. Read more about how the flu jab works. Flu jab side effects Serious side effects of the injected flu vaccine are very rare. You may have a slight temperature and aching muscles for a couple of days after having the jab, and your arm may be a bit sore where you were injected. Read more about the side effects of the flu jab. When to have a flu jab The best time to have a flu vaccine is in the autumn, from the beginning of October to early November, but don't worry if you've missed it, you can have the vaccine later in winter. Ask your GP or pharmacist. The flu jab for 2016\/17 Each year, the viruses that are most likely to cause flu are identified in advance and vaccines are made to match them as closely as possible. The vaccines are recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO). Most injected flu vaccines protect against three types of flu virus: A\/H1N1 \u2013 the strain of flu that caused the swine flu pandemic in 2009 A\/H3N2 \u2013 a strain of flu that mainly affects the elderly and people with risk factors like a long term health condition. In 2016\/17 the vaccine will contain an A\/Hong Kong\/4801\/2014 H3N2-like virus Influenza B - a strain of flu that particularly affects children. In 2016\/17 the vaccine will contain B\/Brisbane\/60\/2008-like virus The nasal spray flu vaccine and some injected vaccines also offer protection against a fourth B strain of virus, which in 2016\/17 is the B\/Phuket\/3073\/2013-like virus. Is there anyone who shouldn't have the flu jab? Most adults can have the injected flu vaccine, but you should avoid it if you have had a serious allergic reaction to a flu jab in the past. Read more about who shouldn't have the flu vaccine. You can find out more by reading the answers to the most common questions that people have about the flu vaccine. Page last reviewed: 12\/07\/2016 Next review due: 12\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 311 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 130  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Children's flu vaccine The children's nasal spray flu vaccine is for two-, three- and four-year-olds, and children in school years one, two and three, plus children with long-term health problems Flu jab in pregnancy Why pregnant women should have the flu jab and where you can get the vaccine NHS Choices links Common cold Common questions about vaccination Swine flu (H1N1) Winter health External links NHS leaflet: flu vaccination 2016-17 (PDF, 550kb) NHS leaflet: flu vaccination 2016-17 info for people with a learning disability (PDF 266kb) healthtalk.org: immunisation Find services near you Find and compare services Services GP Pharmacy Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Shingles vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/shingles-vaccination.aspx","content":"Shingles vaccination - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Shingles vaccination A vaccine to prevent shingles, a common, painful skin disease is available on the NHS to certain people in their 70s. The shingles vaccine is given as a single injection into the upper arm. Unlike the flu jab, you'll only need to have the vaccination once and you can have it at any time of the year. The shingles vaccine is expected to reduce your risk of getting shingles. If you are unlucky enough to go on to have the disease, your symptoms may be milder and the illness shorter. Shingles can be very painful and uncomfortable. Some people are left with pain lasting for years after the initial rash has healed. And shingles is fatal for around 1 in 1,000 over-70s who develop it. It's fine to have the shingles vaccine if you've already had shingles. The shingles vaccine works very well in people who have had shingles before and it will boost your immunity against further shingles attacks. Who can have the shingles vaccination? From September 1 2016 the shingles vaccine is routinely available to people aged 70 and 78. You become eligible for the vaccine on the first day of September 2016 after you've turned 70 or 78 and remain so until the last day of August 2017. In addition, anyone who was eligible for immunisation in the previous three years of the programme but missed out on their shingles vaccination remains eligible until their 80th birthday. This includes: people aged 71, 72 and 73 on 1 September 2016 people aged 79 on 1 September 2016  The shingles vaccine is not available on the NHS if you are aged 80 or over. Until 31 August 2016, the shingles vaccine is still available to all those who were aged 70 or 78 on 1 September 2015. You can have the shingles vaccination at any time of year, though many people will find it convenient to have it at the same time as their annual flu vaccination. Find out more about who is eligible for shingles vaccination. How do I get the shingles vaccine? You don't need to do anything. Your doctor will invite you to the surgery for the vaccine when you become eligible. If you can't go to the appointment you're offered, contact your GP practice to rearrange it. It\u2019s important that you don't leave it too late to have the vaccination, as your GP may only be able to give it to you before 31 August 2017. What is the brand name of the shingles vaccine? The brand name of the shingles vaccine given in the UK is Zostavax. It can be given at any time of the year. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for Zostavax. How does the shingles vaccine work? The vaccine contains a weakened chickenpox virus (varicella-zoster virus). It's similar, but not identical to, the chickenpox vaccine. Very occasionally, people have developed a chickenpox-like illness following shingles vaccination (fewer than 1 in 10,000 individuals). How long will the shingles vaccine protect me for? It's difficult to be precise, but research suggests the shingles vaccine will protect you for at least five years, probably longer. How safe is the shingles vaccine? There is lots of evidence showing that the shingles vaccine is very safe. It's already been used in several countries, including the US and Canada, and no safety concerns have been raised. The vaccine also has few side effects. Read more about shingles vaccine side effects. What is shingles? Shingles, also known as herpes zoster, is a painful skin rash caused by the reactivation of the chickenpox virus (varicella-zoster virus) in people who have previously had chickenpox. It begins with a burning sensation in the skin, followed by a rash of very painful fluid-filled blisters that can then burst and turn into sores before healing. Often an area on just one side of the body is affected, usually the chest but sometimes the head, face and eye. Read more about the symptoms of shingles. How is shingles spread? You don't \"catch\" shingles \u2013 it comes on when there's a reawakening of chickenpox virus that's already in your body. The virus can be reactivated because of advancing age, medication, illness or stress and so on. Anyone who has had chickenpox can get shingles. It's estimated that around one in five people who have had chickenpox go on to develop shingles. Read more about the causes of shingles. Who's most at risk of shingles? People tend to get shingles more often as they get older, especially over the age of  70. And the older you are, the worse it can be. The shingles rash can be extremely painful, such that sufferers can't even bear the feeling of their clothes touching the affected skin. The pain of shingles can also linger long after the rash has disappeared, even for many years. This lingering pain is called postherpetic neuralgia (PHN). Read more about the complications of shingles. There's more information about shingles vaccination in this NHS leaflet. Read the answers to some of the common questions about the shingles vaccine. Page last reviewed: 28\/07\/2015 Next review due: 28\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 577 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 291  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 139  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Shingles Find out about shingles, a painful condition caused by the chickenpox virus Community content from HealthUnlocked Chickenpox Chickenpox is a mild and common illness that most children catch at some point Chickenpox vaccine Find out about the chickenpox (varicella) vaccine for vulnerable children and adults NHS links Symptoms of shingles   Treatment of shingles External links DH Green Book: shingles vaccination NHS leaflet: shingles immunisation (PDF, 238kb) NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Td\/IPV (3-in-1) booster","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/3-in-1-teenage-booster.aspx","content":"3-in-1 teenage booster - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: 3-in-1 teenage booster The teenage booster, also known as the 3-in-1 or the Td\/IPV vaccine, is given as a single injection into the upper arm to boost your child's protection against three separate diseases: tetanus, diphtheria and polio. Who should have the 3-in-1 booster? The 3-in-1 teenage booster, is available routinely on the NHS for all young people aged 14 (school year 9). It is generally given at secondary school at the same time as the Men ACWY vaccine. As a parent, you will be sent a letter from your child's school a week or so before the vaccinations are planned to ask for your or your child's consent. The brand name of the 3-in-1 teenage booster given in the UK is REVAXIS. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for REVAXIS. Read more about which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster jab. How safe is the 3-in-1 booster vaccine? The 3-in-1 teenage booster is a very safe vaccine but, as with all vaccines, some children may have minor side effects, such as swelling, redness or tenderness where you have the injection. Sometimes, a small painless lump develops, but it usually disappears in a few weeks. Read more about the possible side effects of the 3-in-1 vaccination. Read answers to the common questions that parents ask about the 3-in-1 teenage booster jab. This NHS leaflet has more information on immunisations at secondary school. Page last reviewed: 27\/10\/2014 Next review due: 27\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 98 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful NHS Choices links NHS vaccination schedule Common questions about vaccination External links healthtalk.org: real life vaccination stories from parents Oxford Vaccine Group: 3-in-1 booster  NHS leaflet: immunisations for young people (PDF, 491kb) Teen boys 15-18 Turning into a couch potato? Want the truth about drugs and safer sex? Find out how you can get yourself sorted Teen girls 15-18 Read about teen girl health issues, including healthy eating, skin problems and having sex for the first time NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Travel vaccinations","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Travel-immunisation","content":"Travel vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Travel vaccinations  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Travel vaccinations Travel-immunisation Available jabs Introduction  If you're planning to travel outside the UK, you may need to be vaccinated against some of the serious diseases found in other parts of the world. Vaccinations are available to protect you against infections such as yellow fever, typhoid and hepatitis A. In the UK, the childhood vaccination programme protects you against a number of diseases, but doesn't cover most of the infectious diseases found overseas. Which jabs do I need? You can find out which vaccinations are necessary or recommended for the areas you'll be visiting on these two websites: NHS fitfortravel the National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) Some countries require you to have an International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis (ICVP) before you enter. For example, Saudi Arabia requires proof of vaccination against certain types of meningitis for visitors arriving for the Hajj and Umrah pilgrimages. Many tropical countries in Africa and South America won't accept travellers from an area where there's yellow fever unless they can prove they've been vaccinated against it. Read more about the vaccines available for travellers abroad. Where do I get my jabs? You should get advice at least eight weeks before you're due to travel, as some jabs need to be given well in advance. First, phone or visit your GP or practice nurse to find out whether your existing UK jabs are up-to-date (they can tell from your notes). Your GP or practice nurse may also be able to give you general advice about travel vaccinations and travel health, such as protecting yourself from malaria. Your GP or practice nurse can give you a booster of your UK jabs if you need one. They may be able to give you the travel jabs you need, either free on the NHS or for a charge. Alternatively, you can visit a local private travel vaccination clinic for your UK boosters and other travel jabs. Not all vaccinations are available free on the NHS, even if they're recommended for travel to a certain area. Free travel vaccinations The following travel vaccinations are usually available free on the NHS: diphtheria, polio and tetanus (combined booster) typhoid hepatitis A \u2013 including when combined with typhoid or hepatitis B cholera These vaccines are usually free because they protect against diseases thought to represent the greatest risk to public health if they were brought into the country. Private travel vaccinations You're likely to have to pay for travel vaccinations against: hepatitis B when not combined with hepatitis A Japanese encephalitis and tick-borne encephalitis meningitis vaccines  rabies tuberculosis (TB) yellow fever Yellow fever vaccines are only available from designated centres. The NaTHNaC website can help you find a clinic offering yellow fever vaccination. The cost of travel vaccines at private clinics will vary, but could be around £50 for each dose of a vaccine. It's worth considering this when budgeting for your trip. Things to consider There are several things to consider when planning your travel vaccinations, including: the country or countries you're visiting \u2013 some diseases are more common in certain parts of the world and less common in others  when you're travelling \u2013 some diseases are more common at certain times of the year; for example, during the rainy season where you're staying \u2013 in general, you'll be more at risk of disease in rural areas than in urban areas, and if you're backpacking and staying in hostels or camping, you may be more at risk than if you were on a package holiday and staying in a hotel how long you'll be staying \u2013 the longer your stay, the greater your risk of being exposed to diseases your age and health \u2013 some people may be more vulnerable to infection than others, while some vaccinations can't be given to people with certain medical conditions what you'll be doing during your stay \u2013 for example, whether you'll be spending a lot of time outdoors, such as trekking or working in rural areas if you're working as an aid worker \u2013 you may come into contact with more diseases if you're working in a refugee camp or helping after a natural disaster if you're working in a medical setting \u2013 for example, a doctor or nurse may require additional vaccinations if you are in contact with animals \u2013 in this case, you may be more at risk of getting diseases spread by animals, such as rabies If you're only travelling to countries in northern and central Europe, North America or Australia, you're unlikely to need any vaccinations. If possible, see your GP at least eight weeks before you're due to travel. Some vaccinations need to be given well in advance to allow your body to develop immunity. Some also involve multiple doses spread over several weeks. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Speak to your GP before having any vaccinations if: you're pregnant you think you might be pregnant you're breastfeeding In many cases, it's unlikely a vaccine given while pregnant or breastfeeding will cause problems for the baby. However, your GP will be able to give you further advice about this. People with immune deficiencies For some people travelling overseas, vaccination against certain diseases may not be advised. This may be the case if: you have a condition that affects your body's immune system, such as HIV or AIDS you're receiving treatment that affects your immune system, such as chemotherapy you've recently had a bone marrow or organ transplant Your GP can give you further advice about this. Non-travel vaccines As well as getting any travel vaccinations you need, it's also a good opportunity to make sure your other vaccinations are up-to-date and have booster jabs if necessary. Your GP surgery can check your existing vaccination records. People in certain risk groups may be offered extra vaccines. These include vaccinations against diseases such as hepatitis B, tuberculosis (TB), flu and chickenpox. Read more information on NHS vaccines for adults and children to find out whether you should have any. Page last reviewed: 16\/11\/2015 Next review due: 16\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 716 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 165  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 302  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Travel health Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A simple guide to health precautions when travelling abroad, including vaccinations, taking condoms and a first aid kit, and being careful about drinking water. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Healthcare abroad Travel health Travel illnesses Vaccination guide External links fitfortravel GOV.UK: apply for or renew a passport GOV.UK: foreign travel advice GOV.UK: foreign travel advice for people with mental health needs National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) Travax Yellow Card Scheme Before you travel Advice for people travelling abroad, covering jet lag, vaccinations, DVT, travel insurance and sun safety Malaria Approximately 1,500 travellers return to the UK with malaria every year. Find out more about the symptoms and causes, and how you can protect yourself When to have your vaccinations Find out which vaccinations are routinely offered on the NHS and at what age they are needed NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vaccines for kids","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/when-to-get-your-child-vaccinated.aspx","content":"When to get your child vaccinated - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: When to vaccinate your child There's a recommended timetable for routine childhood vaccinations. This timetable has been worked out to give children the best chance of developing immunity against common, but potentially deadly, diseases. When to start childhood vaccinations Routine childhood vaccinations start when a baby is eight weeks old. This is a good age to start vaccinations, because the natural immunity to illness that newborn babies get from their mother is beginning to wear off. If a vaccine is given before eight weeks of age, the baby\u2019s natural immunity to disease may stop it from working. That's why you should ideally have your child vaccinated at the recommended time. Any delay can leave your baby unprotected against illnesses that are often more common and worse in younger children. Vaccinations for premature babies Babies who are born early can have a greater risk of catching infections than babies born on time. This is because their immune systems are less developed and they don\u2019t receive as much natural immunity from their mothers. It\u2019s especially important that premature babies get their vaccines on time, from eight weeks after birth, no matter how premature they are. It may seem very early to give a vaccination to such a tiny baby, but many scientific studies have shown that it\u2019s a good time to give them vaccines. Postponing vaccination until they're older leaves them vulnerable to diseases. If your baby was born very prematurely (before 26 weeks of pregnancy), they may still be in hospital when their first vaccinations are due. In this case, your baby will receive their first vaccines in hospital. Read this NHS leaflet on vaccinations for premature babies (PDF, 221kb). Booster jabs Some vaccines are given more than once. A gap is left between these vaccine doses to make sure that each one has time to work properly. However, the recommended gap is only a minimum. If the gap is longer \u2013 because you missed an appointment, for example \u2013 you don\u2019t have to start the course again. Vaccination timings The NHS childhood vaccination schedule tells you when each routine vaccination should be given. It normally starts when your baby is eight weeks old and is completed by the time they're 18. Other non-routine vaccines may be needed throughout childhood, such as travel vaccines or vaccines for children with certain medical conditions. Page last reviewed: 07\/04\/2016 Next review due: 07\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 36 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Vaccination calendar Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by NHS Choices links Common questions about vaccination External links NHS leaflet: complete immunisation schedule (PDF, 77.6kb) NHS leaflet: pre-school immunisations (PDF, 656kb) healthtalk.org: real life vaccination stories from parents Search for services Find and compare services Services Breasfeeding support services Children's & Adolescent Services Family activities GP Parenting information and support services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vagina, sore and swollen","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaginitis","content":"Vaginitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaginitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vaginitis   Vaginitis is inflammation of the vagina (soreness and swelling). Many women with vaginitis also get: an abnormal vaginal discharge irritation or itching pain while urinating or having sex light bleeding or spotting A strong, unpleasant smell, particularly after sex, can also be a sign. Some women with vaginitis may experience few other symptoms or none at all. Causes of vaginitis Vaginitis may be caused by any of the following infections or irritants: thrush \u2013 a fungal infection that commonly affects the vagina bacterial vaginosis \u2013 a bacterial infection of the vagina trichomoniasis \u2013 a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a tiny parasite chemical irritation \u2013 for example, from perfumed bubble bath, soap or fabric conditioner, or from spermicide (a chemical that kills sperm, sometimes found on condoms) washing inside your vagina chlamydia \u2013 an STI caused by bacteria genital herpes \u2013 an STI caused by the herpes simplex virus Vaginal dryness, itching or discomfort (particularly during sex) can also sometimes be caused by a fall in oestrogen levels after the menopause. This is called vaginal atrophy or atrophic vaginitis, and is due to the thinning of the vagina's lining. When to see your GP See your GP if you have any unusual vaginal symptoms, particularly if: you haven't had a vaginal infection before you've had vaginal infections in the past, but this time your symptoms are different you've had a number of sexual partners or you have a new sexual partner you've finished a course of medication for vaginal thrush, but your symptoms are persisting, or you have an unpleasant vaginal odour There's no need to see your GP if you've been diagnosed with thrush in the past and your symptoms are the same. If you're sure you have thrush and you've treated it successfully in the past with over-the-counter medication, you can treat it yourself again. Read more about over-the-counter thrush medications. Treating vaginitis Treatment for vaginitis depends on what's causing it. Fungal infections are usually treated with antifungal medicines, and bacterial infections are usually treated with antibiotics. Read more about: treating vaginal thrush treating bacterial vaginosis treating trichomoniasis Vaginal atrophy If your vaginitis is caused by thinning of the lining of the vagina after the menopause (atrophic vaginitis), hormone replacement therapy (HRT) may be recommended. HRT replaces the female hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. Creams, pessaries or vaginal tablets that contain oestrogen are also available. Unlike HRT, they only restore oestrogen to your vagina rather than to your whole body, reducing the risk of side effects. Read more about the side effects of HRT. Self care Things you can do at home to help improve your vaginitis include: keeping your genital area clean and dry \u2013 take a warm bath rather than a hot one and use plain, unperfumed soap to clean your genital area (the vagina cleans itself with natural secretions); dry yourself thoroughly avoiding douching (spraying water inside your vagina) \u2013 it may make your vaginitis symptoms worse, by removing the healthy bacteria that line the vagina and help keep it free from infection not using feminine hygiene products \u2013 such as sprays, deodorants or powders using pads rather than tampons if you have an infection wearing loose-fitting cotton underwear \u2013 don't wear underwear at night while you sleep You should also practice safe sex by using condoms to avoid getting or spreading STIs. Read more about contraception. If you're prone to vaginitis, particularly after sex, always apply a lubricant before having sex. There are several types \u2013 some are water-based and some are silicone-based. You may need to try a few before you find one that's suitable. Ask you GP or pharmacist if you need further advice. Page last reviewed: 23\/01\/2015 Next review due: 23\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 180 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the vagina problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/vagina_problems_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Bacterial vaginosis Menopause Sexual health Trichomoniasis Vaginal thrush External links Brook: vaginal infections FPA: help with STIs Vagina health Find out about vaginas, from keeping clean and healthy to what's normal and what's not. Plus, changes after childbirth Vaginal discharge Use this guide to find out whether you have an infection Sexually transmitted infections Find out about the different types of infections you can catch from having unprotected sex or genital contact NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vaginal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-vagina","content":"Vaginal cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaginal cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-vagina Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-vagina Community Vaginal cancer Cancer-of-the-vagina Causes Cancer-of-the-vagina Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-vagina Treatment Introduction  Vaginal cancer is a rare type of cancer that begins in the vagina. Around 260 new cases are diagnosed in the UK each year. Cancer that begins in the vagina is called primary vaginal cancer. Cancer that begins in another part of the body \u2013 such as the cervix, womb or ovaries \u2013 and spreads to the vagina is known as secondary vaginal cancer. This topic is about primary vaginal cancer. There are separate topics on cervical cancer, ovarian cancer and womb cancer. Signs and symptoms The most common symptom of vaginal cancer is abnormal vaginal bleeding. This includes: bleeding between your normal periods, or after sex bleeding after the menopause (post-menopausal bleeding) Other symptoms can include: smelly or bloody vaginal discharge pain during sex pain when urinating needing to urinate more frequently than usual blood in your urine pelvic pain an itch or lump in your vagina See your GP if you experience any abnormal vaginal bleeding, changes in your usual pattern of periods (such as irregular periods or heavier periods than usual), or problems urinating. While it's highly unlikely that these symptoms are caused by vaginal cancer, they should still be investigated by your GP. Read more about diagnosing vaginal cancer. What causes vaginal cancer? The exact causes of vaginal cancer are unknown, but things that may increase your risk of developing it include: being infected with a particularly persistent type of the human papilloma virus (HPV), which can be spread during sex your age \u2013 seven out of every 10 cases of vaginal cancer affect women over 60, although some rare types can affect teenage girls and women in their twenties a previous history of vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN) or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) \u2013 abnormal cells in the vagina or cervix that can sometimes become cancerous As there is a possible link with HPV, it may be possible to reduce your risk of vaginal cancer by practising safe sex. Read more advice on preventing sexually transmitted infections (STIs). The HPV vaccination, which is now routinely offered to girls who are 12 to 13 years old, provides protection against two strains of HPV thought to be responsible for most cases of vaginal and cervical cancer. Read more about the causes of vaginal cancer. How vaginal cancer is treated Treatment for vaginal cancer depends on which part of your vagina is affected and how far the cancer has spread (known as the \"stage\"). The main treatments for vaginal cancer are: radiotherapy \u2013 radiation is used to destroy the cancerous cells surgery to remove the cancerous cells chemotherapy \u2013 medication is used to kill the cancerous cells; this is often used in combination with radiotherapy These treatments can cause both short- and long-term side effects that should be discussed with your care team before treatment begins. Read more about treating vaginal cancer. Outlook The chances of vaginal cancer being cured depend on things such as the stage at which it was diagnosed, your age and your general health. Overall, around six in every 10 women with vaginal cancer will live for at least five years after diagnosis. Around 110 women die from vaginal cancer every year in the UK. Want to know more? Cancer Research UK: vaginal cancer Macmillan: vaginal cancer Page last reviewed: 05\/02\/2015 Next review due: 05\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 29 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the vagina problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/vagina_problems_a_visual_guide.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Useful links NHS Choices links Cervical cancer Chemotherapy Hysterectomy Radiotherapy Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: vaginal cancer The Eve Appeal: vaginal cancer Macmillan: vaginal cancer Postmenopausal bleeding Vaginal bleeding that occurs at least 12 months after your periods have stopped is not normal and shouldn't be ignored Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vaginal discharge","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaginal-discharge","content":"Vaginal discharge - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaginal discharge   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vaginal discharge Introduction  It's normal and healthy to produce a clear or white discharge from your vagina. This mucus is produced naturally from the neck of the womb, known as the cervix. The amount of vaginal discharge varies throughout your menstrual cycle (brown discharge is usually the end of your period) and most pregnant women will get a \"pregnancy discharge\". Healthy discharge doesn't have a strong smell or colour. You may feel an uncomfortable wetness, but you shouldn't have any itching or soreness around your vagina. How do I know if my discharge is unhealthy? Any sudden change to your discharge may indicate a vaginal infection. You should be aware of how your discharge naturally varies throughout your cycle and what isn't normal, but obvious warning signs of infection are: a change in colour or consistency a sudden bad smell an unusually large amount of discharge another symptom alongside the discharge, such as itching outside your vagina or pain in your pelvis or tummy unexpected bleeding from the vagina If you're not sure whether your discharge is normal and are worried about it, see your GP or nurse. Read about sexual health for general information and advice. Common causes of abnormal discharge There are many possible causes of abnormal vaginal discharge, but it's usually a sign of infection. The infection is often caused by something that upsets the natural balance of bacteria or yeast in your vagina, such as washing inside the vagina, or it may be sexually transmitted. The most common causes are: thrush \u2013 a fungal infection that commonly affects the vagina bacterial vaginosis \u2013 a bacterial infection of the vagina trichomoniasis \u2013 a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a tiny parasite gonorrhoea or chlamydia \u2013 STIs caused by bacteria genital herpes \u2013 an STI caused by the herpes simplex virus The guide below may help you identify the cause of your discharge. However, it's important to see your GP for a proper diagnosis and advice on how to treat the infection. Watery or white vaginal discharge with intense itchiness If your discharge is thin and watery, or thick and white (like cottage cheese), you may have thrush. This common fungal infection causes intense itchiness and soreness around your vagina. The discharge may smell slightly yeasty, but doesn't have a strong smell. Almost all women get thrush from time to time and it's not sexually transmitted. It's easily treated with antifungal medicine, which can be bought over the counter from your pharmacist. White or grey fishy-smelling discharge If your vaginal discharge is grey or develops a strong fishy smell, particularly after sexual intercourse, you could have bacterial vaginosis (BV). BV is an imbalance in the normal bacteria found in your vagina. It doesn't usually cause itching or irritation. Like thrush, BV is very common and isn't sexually transmitted. It's easily treated with antibiotics. See your GP for a prescription. Green, yellow or frothy discharge Trichomoniasis is a common STI caused by a tiny parasite. It can make your vaginal discharge frothy, yellow or green. You may have a lot of discharge, which may also have an unpleasant fishy smell. Other possible symptoms are soreness, swelling and itching around the vagina, and pain when passing urine. Trichomoniasis is easily treated with an antibiotic called metronidazole, which your GP will prescribe. If you have trichomoniasis, visit a local GUM or sexual health clinic as it can exist alongside other STIs. Abnormal discharge with pain or bleeding See your GP or go to a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic as soon as possible if your vaginal discharge is abnormal and you have: pain in your pelvis pain when you urinate bleeding between periods or after sex You may have chlamydia or gonorrhoea (both STIs). Gonorrhoea can make your discharge turn green, although often the pain or bleeding are more noticeable. Both conditions are treated with antibiotics. Untreated gonorrhoea or chlamydia may spread upwards and lead to pelvic inflammatory disease, a serious infection of the womb, fallopian tubes or ovaries. Abnormal discharge with blisters around the genitals Genital herpes can cause painful, red blisters or sores to appear around your genitals, as well as an abnormal vaginal discharge. See your GP or go to a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic as soon as possible. You may be offered a course of antiviral tablets, which stop the herpes virus multiplying, but the symptoms may have a tendency to return. Young girls and post-menopausal women It's unusual for young girls to have abnormal vaginal discharge before they've gone through puberty. If this happens, they should see a GP. A common cause is a type of vulvitis (inflammation of the vulval area), caused by a streptococcal infection. Abnormal discharge is also unusual in older women. If you've gone through the menopause and suddenly notice an abnormal vaginal discharge, see your doctor as soon as possible. Possible causes include: a sexually transmitted infection (STI) cervical polyps \u2013 non-cancerous growths in the womb or lining of the cervix (neck of the womb) an intrauterine device (IUD) It's also important to rule out cervical cancer or endometrial cancer. Cleaning your vagina The vagina is self-cleansing, so there is no need to wash inside it (called douching). Douching can upset the natural balance of bacteria and fungi in your vagina and lead to thrush or bacterial vaginosis. Vaginal soreness and abnormal vaginal discharge can also be caused by overusing perfumed soaps, bubble baths and shower gels. Never clean your vagina with anything strongly perfumed. Use a mild soap and warm water to gently wash around your genitals. Page last reviewed: 12\/12\/2014 Next review due: 12\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 836 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 387  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 206  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 128  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the vagina problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/vagina_problems_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Bacterial vaginosis Sexual health Thrush Trichomoniasis External links Brook: sexually transmitted infections Vaginal discharge in pregnancy Find out about increased vaginal discharge in pregnancy, and when you need to see a doctor Girls' bodies Answers to questions about girls' bodies, including puberty, sex, periods, vaginal discharge, and pregnancy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vaginal dryness","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/dry-vagina","content":"Vaginal dryness - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaginal dryness  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Vaginal dryness is a common but treatable problem that many women experience at some point in their lives. It can be a problem at any age, but is a particular issue for women who are going through or have experienced the menopause. Don't ignore a dry vagina or feel embarrassed to seek help if it's a problem for you. There are a number of treatments that can help. This page covers: Symptoms Causes What to do Treatments Symptoms of a dry vagina Some women only have symptoms of vaginal dryness at certain times, such as during sex, while others have them all the time. Problems associated with having a dry vagina include: vaginal irritation, discomfort, itchiness or a burning sensation discomfort during sex a reduced sex drive difficulty getting aroused and reaching orgasm the surface of the vagina looks pale and thin narrowing or shortening of the vagina needing to pee more often than usual repeated urinary tract infections (UTIs) Causes of vaginal dryness Causes of a dry vagina include: the menopause \u2013 decreased levels of the hormone oestrogen during the menopause can cause persistent vaginal dryness (also known as vaginal atrophy or atrophic vaginitis) breastfeeding or childbirth \u2013 oestrogen levels can temporarily decrease after giving birth and make your vagina feel drier than usual not being aroused before sex \u2013 if you don't feel aroused before having sex, your vagina may not produce natural lubricant and sex may be uncomfortable some types of contraception \u2013 the combined contraceptive pill and contraceptive injection can occasionally cause vaginal dryness, although this is uncommon cancer treatment \u2013 radiotherapy to the pelvic area, hormonal cancer treatments, and sometimes chemotherapy can cause vaginal dryness Vaginal dryness is also sometimes caused by an underlying condition such as diabetes or Sjögren's syndrome, where the immune attacks the glands in the body that produce fluid. What to do if you have a dry vagina If you're having problems with vaginal dryness, it's worth trying self-help options first. It can help to: try using a lubricant or vaginal moisturiser \u2013 these can be bought without a prescription give yourself enough time to become aroused before having sex \u2013 read more about female arousal and get good sex tips It's a good idea to see your GP for advice if: self-help measures aren't effective your symptoms are particularly severe and are interfering with your normal activities you have other troublesome symptoms, such as hot flushes and night sweats Don't feel embarrassed about seeking help. Vaginal dryness is a common problem that GPs see frequently. Treatments for vaginal dryness The main treatments that can help if you have a dry vagina are: Lubricants Vaginal moisturisers Vaginal oestrogen Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Lubricants Lubricants are liquids or gels that you apply to your vulva, vagina or your partner's penis just before having sex to keep your vagina moist. They offer immediate but short-term relief from vaginal dryness. Several different brands of lubricant are available to buy from shops and pharmacies without a prescription. You may need to experiment with a few different types to find one that works best for you. Vaginal moisturisers Vaginal moisturisers are creams that you apply inside your vagina to keep it moist. They may be better than lubricants if the dryness isn't just causing problems during sex, as they tend to have a longer-lasting effect. They usually need to be applied every few days. As with lubricants, several different brands are available to buy. You may need to experiment with a few different types to find one that works best for you. Water-based moisturisers are generally best, as oil or petroleum-based products can damage latex condoms and sometimes irritate the vagina.    Vaginal oestrogen Your GP may prescribe vaginal oestrogen if your dryness is caused by the menopause. This works by increasing the level of oestrogen that declines during and after the menopause. Vaginal oestrogen is available as pills you place in your vagina (pessaries), vaginal creams and vaginal rings. These all work equally well, but you may find one type more convenient to use. Oestrogen treatment can be more effective than lubricants and moisturisers for menopausal women, and it generally causes few side effects. However, it can take a few weeks to start working, so you may want to use a lubricant or moisturiser as well to begin with. Treatment usually needs to be continued indefinitely, as the dryness tends to return if treatment stops. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) HRT is a treatment that involves taking medication to replace the hormones that start to decline during the menopause. It's available on prescription from your GP either as tablets, a skin patch, an implant under the skin, or a gel that's applied to the skin. HRT has a wider effect on the body than vaginal oestrogen, so may be best if you have other menopause symptoms, such as hot flushes. However, it also has more side effects. Read more about HRT and the side effects of HRT. Page last reviewed: 05\/05\/2016 Next review due: 05\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 23 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Good sex advice Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Living with the menopause Menopause External links Menopause Matters Sex after the menopause When the menopause hits, so can sexual problems. But there is a range of solutions Sex and contraception after childbirth Advice on sex and contraception after having a baby, including advice on how to make sure sex is pleasurable NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vaginal prolapse","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prolapse-of-the-uterus","content":"Pelvic organ prolapse - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic organ prolapse  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prolapse-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Pelvic organ prolapse Prolapse-of-the-uterus Treatment Introduction  Pelvic organ prolapse is bulging of one or more of the pelvic organs into the vagina. These organs are the uterus, vagina, bowel and bladder. Symptoms may include: a sensation of a bulge or something coming down or out of the vagina, which sometimes needs to be pushed back discomfort during sex problems passing urine \u2013 such as slow stream, a feeling of not emptying the bladder fully, needing to urinate more often and leaking a small amount of urine when you cough, sneeze or exercise (stress incontinence) Some women with a pelvic organ prolapse don't have any symptoms and the condition is only discovered during an internal examination for another reason, such as a cervical screening. When to see your GP Pelvic organ prolapse isn't life-threatening, but it can affect your quality of life. See your GP if you have any of the symptoms of a prolapse, or if you notice a lump in or around your vagina. Internal pelvic examination Your doctor will need to carry out an internal pelvic examination. They'll ask you to undress from the waist down and lie back on the examination bed, while they feel for any lumps in your pelvic area. Some women may put off going to their GP if they're embarrassed or worried about what the doctor may find. However, the examination is important, only takes a few minutes and is similar to having a smear test. Further tests If you have bladder symptoms, such as needing to rush to the toilet or leaking when you cough and sneeze, further tests may need to be carried out in hospital. For example, a small tube (catheter) may be inserted into your bladder to examine your bladder function and identify any leakage problems. This test is known as urodynamics. Your doctor will decide if further tests are needed before treating the prolapse. Types of prolapse If pelvic organ prolapse is confirmed, it will usually be staged to indicate how severe it is. Most often, a number system is used, ranging from one to four, with four indicating a severe prolapse. Pelvic organ prolapse can affect the front, top or back of the vagina. The main types of prolapse are: anterior prolapse (cystocele) \u2013 where the bladder bulges into the front wall of the vagina prolapse of the uterus and cervix or top of the vagina \u2013 which can be the result of previous treatment to remove the womb (hysterectomy) posterior wall prolapse (rectocoele or enterocoele) \u2013 when the bowel bulges forward into the back wall of the vagina It's possible to have more than one of these types of prolapse at the same time. Why does prolapse happen? Prolapse is caused by weakening of tissues that support the pelvic organs. Although there's rarely a single cause, the risk of developing pelvic organ prolapse can be increased by: your age \u2013 prolapse is more common as you get older childbirth, particularly if you had a long or difficult labour, or gave birth to multiple babies or a large baby \u2013 up to half of all women who have had children are affected by some degree of prolapse changes caused by the menopause \u2013 such as weakening of tissue and low levels of the hormone oestrogen being overweight, obese or having large fibroids (non-cancerous tumours in or around the womb) or pelvic cysts \u2013 which creates extra pressure in the pelvic area previous pelvic surgery \u2013 such as a hysterectomy or bladder repair repeated heavy lifting and manual work long-term coughing or sneezing \u2013 for example, if you smoke, have a lung condition or allergy excessive straining when going to the toilet because of long-term constipation Certain conditions can also cause the tissues in your body to become weak, making a prolapse more likely, including: joint hypermobility syndrome \u2013 where your joints are very loose Marfan syndrome \u2013 an inherited condition that affects the blood vessels, eyes and skeleton Ehlers-Danlos syndrome \u2013 a group of inherited conditions that affect collagen proteins in the body Can a prolapse be prevented? There are several things you can do to reduce your risk of prolapse, including: doing regular pelvic floor exercises maintaining a healthy weight or losing weight if you're overweight eating a high-fibre diet with plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and wholegrain bread and cereal to avoid constipation and straining when going to the toilet avoiding heavy lifting If you smoke, stopping smoking may also help to reduce your risk of a prolapse. How is prolapse treated? Many women with prolapse don't need treatment, as the problem doesn't seriously interfere with their normal activities. Lifestyle changes such as weight loss and pelvic floor exercises are usually recommended in mild cases. If the symptoms require treatment, a prolapse may be treated effectively using a device inserted into the vagina, called a vaginal pessary. This helps to hold the prolapsed organ in place. Surgery may also be an option for some women. This usually involves giving support to the prolapsed organ. In some cases, complete removal of the womb (hysterectomy) is required, especially if the womb has prolapsed out. Most women experience a better quality of life after surgery, but there's a risk of problems remaining or even getting worse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/02\/2015 Next review due: 05\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1570 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 633  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 471  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 170  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 215  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Hysterectomy Urinary incontinence Women's health 40-60 External links MHRA: safety of vaginal meshes for pelvic organ prolapse NICE: infracoccygeal sacropexy using mesh NICE: insertion of mesh uterine suspension sling NHS leaflet: what is a sacrospinous fixation? (PDF, 65Kb) NICE: sacrocolpopexy with hysterectomy using mesh Women's Health Concern: prolapse Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Your body after childbirth Having a baby changes your body. Here's how it may change and some exercises and techniques to help. Find and choose services for Prolapse of the uterus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vaginismus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Vaginismus","content":""},{"name":"Vaginitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaginitis","content":"Vaginitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaginitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vaginitis   Vaginitis is inflammation of the vagina (soreness and swelling). Many women with vaginitis also get: an abnormal vaginal discharge irritation or itching pain while urinating or having sex light bleeding or spotting A strong, unpleasant smell, particularly after sex, can also be a sign. Some women with vaginitis may experience few other symptoms or none at all. Causes of vaginitis Vaginitis may be caused by any of the following infections or irritants: thrush \u2013 a fungal infection that commonly affects the vagina bacterial vaginosis \u2013 a bacterial infection of the vagina trichomoniasis \u2013 a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a tiny parasite chemical irritation \u2013 for example, from perfumed bubble bath, soap or fabric conditioner, or from spermicide (a chemical that kills sperm, sometimes found on condoms) washing inside your vagina chlamydia \u2013 an STI caused by bacteria genital herpes \u2013 an STI caused by the herpes simplex virus Vaginal dryness, itching or discomfort (particularly during sex) can also sometimes be caused by a fall in oestrogen levels after the menopause. This is called vaginal atrophy or atrophic vaginitis, and is due to the thinning of the vagina's lining. When to see your GP See your GP if you have any unusual vaginal symptoms, particularly if: you haven't had a vaginal infection before you've had vaginal infections in the past, but this time your symptoms are different you've had a number of sexual partners or you have a new sexual partner you've finished a course of medication for vaginal thrush, but your symptoms are persisting, or you have an unpleasant vaginal odour There's no need to see your GP if you've been diagnosed with thrush in the past and your symptoms are the same. If you're sure you have thrush and you've treated it successfully in the past with over-the-counter medication, you can treat it yourself again. Read more about over-the-counter thrush medications. Treating vaginitis Treatment for vaginitis depends on what's causing it. Fungal infections are usually treated with antifungal medicines, and bacterial infections are usually treated with antibiotics. Read more about: treating vaginal thrush treating bacterial vaginosis treating trichomoniasis Vaginal atrophy If your vaginitis is caused by thinning of the lining of the vagina after the menopause (atrophic vaginitis), hormone replacement therapy (HRT) may be recommended. HRT replaces the female hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. Creams, pessaries or vaginal tablets that contain oestrogen are also available. Unlike HRT, they only restore oestrogen to your vagina rather than to your whole body, reducing the risk of side effects. Read more about the side effects of HRT. Self care Things you can do at home to help improve your vaginitis include: keeping your genital area clean and dry \u2013 take a warm bath rather than a hot one and use plain, unperfumed soap to clean your genital area (the vagina cleans itself with natural secretions); dry yourself thoroughly avoiding douching (spraying water inside your vagina) \u2013 it may make your vaginitis symptoms worse, by removing the healthy bacteria that line the vagina and help keep it free from infection not using feminine hygiene products \u2013 such as sprays, deodorants or powders using pads rather than tampons if you have an infection wearing loose-fitting cotton underwear \u2013 don't wear underwear at night while you sleep You should also practice safe sex by using condoms to avoid getting or spreading STIs. Read more about contraception. If you're prone to vaginitis, particularly after sex, always apply a lubricant before having sex. There are several types \u2013 some are water-based and some are silicone-based. You may need to try a few before you find one that's suitable. Ask you GP or pharmacist if you need further advice. Page last reviewed: 23\/01\/2015 Next review due: 23\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 180 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the vagina problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/vagina_problems_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Bacterial vaginosis Menopause Sexual health Trichomoniasis Vaginal thrush External links Brook: vaginal infections FPA: help with STIs Vagina health Find out about vaginas, from keeping clean and healthy to what's normal and what's not. Plus, changes after childbirth Vaginal discharge Use this guide to find out whether you have an infection Sexually transmitted infections Find out about the different types of infections you can catch from having unprotected sex or genital contact NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Varicella (chickenpox) vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/chickenpox-vaccine.aspx","content":"Chickenpox (varicella) vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Chickenpox vaccine The chickenpox vaccine protects against the varicella zoster virus that causes chickenpox. The chickenpox vaccine is not part of the routine childhood vaccination schedule. It is currently only offered on the NHS to people who are in close contact with someone who is particularly vulnerable to chickenpox or its complications. There are two chickenpox vaccines currently available. The brand names of the chickenpox vaccine are VARIVAX and VARILRIX. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for VARIVAX. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for VARILRIX Who is at risk from chickenpox? Chickenpox is a common childhood infection. Usually, it's mild and complications are rare. Almost all children develop immunity to chickenpox after infection, so most only catch it once. The disease can be more severe in adults. Certain groups of people, however, are at greater risk of serious complications from chickenpox. These include: people who have weakened immune systems through illnesses such as HIV or treatments like chemotherapy pregnant women \u2013 chickenpox can be very serious for an unborn baby when a pregnant woman catches the infection. It can cause a range of serious birth defects, as well as severe disease in the baby when it is born. Read more about what to do if you catch or are exposed to chickenpox in pregnancy Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? It is recommended for certain individuals, such as: non-immune healthcare workers people who come into close contact with someone who has a weakened immune system This is to lower the chances of infecting people at risk. For example, if you're having chemotherapy treatment, it's advisable that non-immune children close to you are given the chickenpox vaccine. The vaccine would also be recommended if you were about to start work in a radiotherapy department and had not had chickenpox before. Read more about who should have the chickenpox vaccine. How the chickenpox vaccine works The chickenpox vaccine is a live vaccine and contains a small amount of weakened chickenpox-causing virus. The vaccine stimulates your immune system to produce antibodies that will help protect against chickenpox. Read more about live vaccines. Read more about chickenpox vaccine side effects. How is the chickenpox vaccine given? The vaccine is given as two separate injections, usually into the upper arm, four to eight weeks apart. How effective is the chickenpox vaccine? It's been shown that 9 out of 10 children vaccinated with a single dose will develop immunity against chickenpox. Two doses are recommended, as this gives an even better immune response. The vaccination is not quite as effective after childhood. It's estimated that three-quarters of teenagers and adults who are vaccinated will become immune to chickenpox. If you are worried your child has a rash that could be chickenpox, take a look at this childhood rashes slideshow to see if the rash is a typical symptom of chickenpox or another childhood condition. Read answers to common questions about the chickenpox vaccine. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the baby rashes information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/baby_rashes_a_visual_guide.html Page last reviewed: 31\/03\/2016 Next review due: 31\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 57 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Chickenpox Chickenpox is a mild and common illness that most children catch at some point NHS Choices links NHS vaccination schedule Shingles External links Green Book: chickenpox vaccination  healthtalk.org: real immunisation stories Find your local GP Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Skin rashes in babies Most rashes in babies are harmless and clear on their own. Find out about the common causes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Varicose eczema","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Eczema-(varicose)-","content":"Varicose eczema - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Varicose eczema  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Eczema-(varicose)- Clinical trials Eczema-(varicose)- Community Varicose eczema Eczema-(varicose)- Causes Eczema-(varicose)- Diagnosis Eczema-(varicose)- Treatment Introduction  Varicose eczema is a long-term skin condition that affects the lower legs and is common in people with varicose veins. It is also known as venous eczema, gravitational eczema and stasis eczema. Signs and symptoms Like all types of eczema, the affected skin becomes: itchy red and swollen dry and flaky  scaly or crusty There may be periods when these symptoms improve and periods when they become more severe. Your legs may become swollen, especially towards the end of the day or after long periods of standing. Varicose veins (swollen and enlarged veins) are often visible on the legs. Some people also have other symptoms, such as: brown discolouration of the skin red, tender and tight skin that can eventually become hardened (lipodermatosclerosis) small, white scars (atrophie blanche) pain eczema affecting other parts of the body Left untreated, leg ulcers can develop. These are long-lasting wounds that form where the skin has become damaged. When to seek medical advice See your GP if you have symptoms of varicose eczema. They will often be able to make a diagnosis simply by looking at the skin. Read more about diagnosing varicose eczema. What causes varicose eczema?  Varicose eczema is caused by increased pressure in the leg veins. When the small valves in the veins stop working properly, it's difficult for blood to be pushed against gravity and it can leak backwards. This increases the pressure in the veins, which can cause fluid to leak into the surrounding tissue. It is thought that varicose eczema may develop as a result of the immune system reacting to this fluid. Varicose eczema is more common in people with varicose veins, as these are also often a sign that the leg veins aren\u2019t working properly. Read more about the causes of varicose eczema. How varicose eczema is treated Varicose eczema tends to be a long-term problem. However, treatments are available to help keep it under control. For most people, treatment involves a combination of: self-help measures \u2013 including ways to improve your circulation, such as keeping active and frequently raising your legs emollients \u2013 moisturisers applied to the skin to stop it becoming dry) topical corticosteroids \u2013 ointments and creams applied to the skin to help treat the eczema and relieve symptoms compression stockings \u2013 specially designed stockings, usually worn every day, that steadily squeeze your legs and help to improve your circulation If these treatments don\u2019t help, your GP may refer you to a dermatologist (skin specialist) in case there is another cause for your symptoms or if they are concerned you may also have a type of eczema called contact dermatitis. If you also have varicose veins, you may be referred to a vascular specialist (a doctor or surgeon specialising in conditions affecting the blood vessels) who can talk to you about the treatment options for varicose veins. Read more about treating varicose eczema. Other types of eczema Eczema is the name for a group of skin conditions that cause dry, irritated skin. Other types of eczema include: atopic eczema (also called atopic dermatitis) \u2013 the most common type of eczema contact dermatitis \u2013 a type of eczema that occurs when the body comes into contact with a particular substance discoid eczema \u2013 a type of eczema that occurs in circular or oval patches on the skin Page last reviewed: 20\/10\/2014 Next review due: 20\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 263 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atopic eczema Contact dermatitis Emollients Leg ulcers Topical corticosteroids Varicose veins External links British Association of Dermatologists (BAD): venous eczema British Varicose Vein Centre (BVVC): varicose veins Circulation Foundation National Eczema Society: gravitational eczema Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Varicose veins","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Varicose-veins","content":"Varicose veins - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Varicose veins  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Varicose-veins Real stories Varicose-veins Clinical trials Varicose veins Varicose-veins Symptoms Varicose-veins Causes Varicose-veins Diagnosis Varicose-veins Treatment Varicose-veins Complications Introduction  Varicose veins are swollen and enlarged veins \u2013 usually blue or dark purple \u2013 that usually occur on the legs. They may also be lumpy, bulging or twisted in appearance. Other symptoms include: aching, heavy and uncomfortable legs swollen feet and ankles muscle cramp in your legs dry skin and colour changes in the lower leg Read more about the symptoms of varicose veins. Your GP can diagnose varicose veins based on these symptoms, although further tests may be carried out. Read more about diagnosing varicose veins. Why do varicose veins happen? Varicose veins develop when the small valves inside the veins stop working properly. In a healthy vein, blood flows smoothly to the heart. The blood is prevented from flowing backwards by a series of tiny valves that open and close to let blood through. If the valves weaken or are damaged, the blood can flow backwards and collect in the vein, eventually causing it to be swollen and enlarged (varicose). Certain things can increase your chances of developing varicose veins, such as: pregnancy being overweight old age Read more about the causes of varicose veins. Who is affected? Varicose veins are a common condition, affecting up to 3 in 10 adults. Women are more likely to develop them than men. Any vein in the body can become varicose, but they most commonly develop in the legs and feet, particularly in the calves. This is because standing and walking puts extra pressure on the veins in the lower body. Treating varicose veins For most people, varicose veins don't present a serious health problem. They may have an unpleasant appearance, but should not affect circulation or cause long-term health problems. Most varicose veins don't require any treatment. If treatment is necessary, your doctor may first recommend up to six months of using compression stockings, taking regular exercise and elevating the affected area when resting. If your varicose veins are still causing you pain or discomfort \u2013 or they cause complications \u2013 they can be treated in several ways, the most common being: endothermal ablation \u2013 treatment where heat is used to seal affected veins sclerotherapy \u2013 this uses special foam to close the veins ligation and stripping \u2013 this involves surgery to remove the affected veins It's unlikely you'll receive treatment on the NHS for cosmetic reasons \u2013 you'll have to pay for this privately. If you do feel you require treatment, it might help if you print out treatment options for varicose veins to discuss with your GP. Read more about treating varicose veins and complications of varicose veins. Preventing varicose veins There is little evidence to suggest you can stop varicose veins getting worse, or completely prevent new ones developing. However, there are ways to ease symptoms of existing varicose veins, such as: avoiding standing or sitting still for long periods and trying to move around every 30 minutes taking regular breaks throughout the day, raising the legs on pillows while resting to ease discomfort exercising regularly \u2013 this can improve circulation and help maintain a healthy weight Varicose veins: an animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Varicose veins are swollen veins that are usually dark blue or purple. This animation explains what causes varicose veins, the symptoms and treatment options. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Types of varicose veins There are several types of varicose veins, such as: trunk varicose veins \u2013 these are near to the surface of the skin and are thick and knobbly; they are usually visible, often quite long, and can look unpleasant reticular varicose veins \u2013 these are red and are sometimes grouped close together in a network telangiectasia varicose veins \u2013 also known as thread veins or spider veins, these are small clusters of blue or red veins that sometimes appear on your face or legs; they are harmless and, unlike trunk varicose veins, do not bulge underneath the surface of the skin Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 848 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 320  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 244  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 82  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Deep vein thrombosis How long should I wear compression stockings? Varicose eczema Venous leg ulcer Women's health 40-60 Women's health over 60 External links British Vein Institute: investigating varicose veins NICE guidance: laser treatment NICE guidance: radiofrequency ablation NICE guidance: transilluminated powered phlebectomy NICE: varicose veins in the legs Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Women's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information and advice for women aged 60 and over NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vascular dementia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vascular-dementia","content":"Vascular dementia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vascular dementia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview vascular-dementia Clinical trials Vascular dementia vascular-dementia Symptoms vascular-dementia Causes vascular-dementia Diagnosis vascular-dementia Treatment Introduction  Vascular dementia is a common form of dementia that's estimated to affect more than 135,000 people in the UK. The term dementia describes a loss of mental ability (cognitive impairment) associated with gradual death of brain cells. It's rare in anyone younger than 65. Signs and symptoms Many cases of vascular dementia start with early warning signs, including slight: slowness of thought difficulty with planning trouble with language problems with attention and concentration mood or behavioural changes See your GP if you notice these signs. If it's spotted at an early stage, lifestyle changes and treatment may be able to stop the vascular dementia getting worse, or at least slow its progression. Left untreated, your symptoms may continue to get worse. Read more about the symptoms of vascular dementia. What causes vascular dementia? Vascular dementia is caused by reduced blood flow to the brain, which damages and eventually kills the brain cells.  This can develop as a result of: narrowing and blockage of the small blood vessels deep inside the brain (known as small vessel disease) a single large stroke (where the blood supply to part of the brain is suddenly cut off) lots of mini-strokes that cause tiny, but widespread, damage to the brain In many cases, these problems are linked to underlying health conditions \u2013 such as high blood pressure and diabetes \u2013 as well as lifestyle factors, such as smoking and being overweight. This may mean tackling these things might reduce your risk of vascular dementia in later life, as well as other serious problems such as strokes, although it's not yet clear exactly how much your risk of dementia can be reduced. Read more about the causes of vascular dementia. Diagnosing vascular dementia See your GP if you think you may have early symptoms of dementia. If you're worried about someone else, encourage them to make an appointment and maybe suggest you go along with them. Your GP can do some simple checks to see if there is a chance you could have dementia, and they can refer you to a specialist if necessary. The specialist will carry out a physical check-up and an assessment of your mental abilities. You may also have blood tests and brain scans. The results of these checks and tests will give your doctor a good idea as to whether your symptoms are caused by vascular dementia, another type of dementia, or something else entirely. Read more about the diagnosis of vascular dementia. How vascular dementia is managed There is no specific treatment for vascular dementia and no way to reverse the damage to the brain that has already occurred. However, treatment may help slow down the progression of the condition. Medicines and lifestyle changes will be recommended to tackle the underlying cause, such as high blood pressure. This includes: eating healthily losing weight, if you are overweight stopping smoking, if you smoke getting fit cutting down on alcohol Support such as physiotherapy, occupational therapy and speech and language therapy can help people regain lost functions, and dementia activities such as memory cafés and some psychological therapies can help manage symptoms. Read more about treating vascular dementia. Outlook The symptoms of vascular dementia will usually get steadily worse over time. This often happens in sudden steps, with relatively stable periods in between, although it's difficult to predict when these steps will happen. Although treatment can help, vascular dementia can significantly shorten life expectancy. The average survival time from diagnosis is around four years. Most people will die either from complications of dementia, such as pneumonia, or from a subsequent stroke. If you or a loved one has been diagnosed with dementia, you are not alone. The NHS, social services and voluntary organisations will be able to provide advice and support to help you and your family. More information Living with dementia Find dementia activities near you Living well with dementia  Staying independent with dementia  Dementia activities  Looking after someone with dementia  Dementia and your relationships  Communicating with people with dementia  Coping with dementia behaviour changes  Care and support Sources of help and support  Talk it through with a dementia nurse Organising care at home  Dementia and care homes  Dementia, social services and the NHS  Dementia and your money  Managing legal affairs for someone with dementia  End of life planning  How you can help Become a Dementia Friend  Share your dementia experiences Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 22\/01\/2015 Next review due: 22\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 142 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links About dementia Alzheimer's disease Caring for someone with dementia Find dementia support services High blood pressure Memory café video NHS Health Check External links Alzheimer's Society: vascular dementia Dementia UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): supporting people with dementia Your guide to dementia Do you think you, or someone you know, might have dementia? Read about the signs to look for and how to get help and support Sign up for dementia information emails Have you been diagnosed with dementia or know someone who has? Sign up to receive six weekly emails full of information and advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vasculitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vasculitis","content":"Vasculitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vasculitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vasculitis Introduction  Vasculitis literally means 'inflammation of the blood vessels'. Inflammation is your immune system's response to tissue that has become injured or infected. Damaged cells release chemicals that cause blood vessels to leak fluid into the tissues, causing tissue swelling. If there's an infection, this helps isolate the invading germ.  In vasculitis, your immune system attacks the blood vessels by mistake. The trigger may be an infection, a medicine or another medical condition. Sometimes, however, the cause isn't clear. It leads to swollen blood vessel walls and narrowed blood vessels. Blood flow to tissues and organs is reduced or blocked. If the blood vessel wall becomes weak, bleeding can occur. Any blood vessel can become inflamed like this, from large arteries (\"arteritis\") to small blood vessels, in any place in the body. The larger the blood vessels affected, the more damage there may be. All these variables mean there are many possible types of vasculitis, each with different symptoms and potential complications. These are covered below (ordered by size of the affected blood vessels): Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis) Polymyalgia rheumatica  Takayasu arteritis  Polyarteritis nodosa  Kawasaki disease Granulomatosis with polyangiitis  Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis  Microscopic polyangiitis Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura  Less common types  These types of vasculitis are briefly explained below, with links taking you to more detailed information. Giant cell arteritis Giant cell arteritis is an age-related condition in which medium and large arteries, usually in the head and neck, become inflamed. It's sometimes called \"temporal arteritis\", because the arteries around the temples are often affected. Symptoms of giant cell arteritis include: aching and soreness around the temples jaw muscle pain while eating vision loss It tends to only affect adults over the age of 50, and the cause is unclear. The main treatment is steroid medication (usually prednisolone), which is given promptly when the diagnosis is suspected.  Read more about giant cell arteritis. Polymyalgia rheumatica  Polymyalgia rheumatica is another age-related condition closely related to giant cell arteritis. It causes pain, stiffness and inflammation in the muscles around the shoulders, neck and hips. It may also cause more general symptoms, such as a fever, extreme tiredness, loss of appetite, weight loss and depression. The condition is two to three times more common in women than men, and most people diagnosed with it are over 70 years old. The cause is unclear.  The main treatment is usually prednisolone (a steroid medication), which is usually used in lower doses than for giant cell arteritis.  Read more about polymyalgia rheumatica. Takayasu arteritis Takayasu arteritis is rare in the UK. The main artery from the heart is affected, along with the major arteries branching off this. These arteries gradually narrow over time, which reduces the blood supply to the limbs and other parts of the body. Treatment is usually steroid medication. Read information about Takayasu arteritis from Vasculitis UK. Polyarteritis nodosa Polyarteritis nodosa is a rare form of vasculitis, in which the medium or smaller arteries become damaged and inflamed. It particularly affects the arteries supplying the gut, kidneys and nerves. Sometimes, only part of the artery wall is affected, which becomes weak and may bulge, forming an aneurysm. If this leaks or ruptures, it can cause serious internal bleeding. Polyarteritis nodosa can also affect the whole wall of the artery at a particular point, and cause a blockage. The condition is potentially very serious. Typical symptoms are feeling unwell with fever, skin rashes, tummy aches, nerve damage and weight loss. Polyarteritis nodosa can sometimes be triggered by an infection, but the exact cause is uncertain. Read information about polyarteritis nodosa from the Great Ormond Street Hospital website. Kawasaki disease Kawasaki disease is a rare condition that affects small and medium arteries in children under the age of five.  The characteristic symptoms of Kawasaki disease are a high temperature that lasts for more than five days, with a rash, swollen glands in the neck, red fingers or toes, red eyes and redness of the lips, tongue or mouth. Kawasaki disease can affect the coronary arteries (the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart), so some children with Kawasaki disease experience heart complications. The trigger is thought to be an infection, although the exact cause is not fully understood. The affected child will usually need to be managed in hospital, because of the risk of complications \u2013 they will need to be carefully assessed for heart problems and treated with immunoglobulins and aspirin. Read more about Kawasaki disease. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener\u2019s granulomatosis)  Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is an uncommon disorder that mainly affects the blood vessels in the nose, sinuses, ears, lungs and kidneys. It can cause a wide range of symptoms, including fever, night sweats, sinusitis, nosebleeds and crusting of the nose, shortness of breath, coughing up blood and kidney impairment. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a serious condition that can be fatal if left untreated, because it can lead to tissue damage and organ failure. High doses of drugs are needed to dampen down the immune system and bring the inflammation under control. Typically, it is treated with steroid medications (prednisone) and cyclophosphamide \u2013 a cancer drug that suppresses the immune system. Read more about granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg\u2013Strauss syndrome) Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a type of vasculitis that typically causes allergic sinusitis and asthma to develop in adults. It mainly affects adults aged 30-45. Many of the other symptoms are general and include fever, muscle and joint aches, tiredness, loss of appetite and weight loss. The condition can also affect the nerves, causing weakness, pins and needles or numbness, and it sometimes damages the heart muscle. Read information about Eosinophilic granulomatosis from Vasculitis UK. Microscopic polyangiitis Microscopic polyangiitis is another rare and potentially serious long-term vasculitis. Inflammation of the blood vessel walls may affect any organ, but particularly the lungs, kidneys and nervous system. It can lead to raised blood pressure, kidney impairment, anaemia, breathlessness and coughing up blood.  Read information from the Oxford University Hospitals NHS website about microscopic polyangiitis. Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura (HSP) Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) is a rare condition, usually seen in children, which results in a skin rash and joint and tummy pain. It can follow a recent infection. Inflammation of the blood vessels can cause the small surface blood vessels to bleed into the skin, which results in a characteristic rash (purpura). Joint pain is also common. HSP can also affect blood vessels in the bowel and the kidneys, and can cause tummy pain and visible blood in the urine or stools. HSP usually gets better without treatment and is not usually serious. Read more about Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Less common types of vasculitis  Behçet's disease \u2013 typically results in mouth ulcers and genital ulcers, and is more common in people from Greece, Turkey, the Middle East, China and Japan Buerger's disease (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 affects vessels in the legs and arms, leading to reduced blood flow to the hands and feet Primary angiitis of the central nervous system (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 inflammation of the brain's blood vessels Cogan's Syndrome (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 inflammation of the inner ears and eyes Cryoglobulin-associated vasculitis (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 associated with cryoglobulins (proteins in the blood that stick together in the cold); can cause a rash on the lower limbs, joint pain or arthritis, nerve damage, abdominal pain and kidney failure Hypersensitivity vasculitis (links to Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 most commonly caused by sensitivity to a drug such as penicillin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or the contraceptive pill, and results in a skin rash  Vasculitis caused by rheumatoid arthritis (links to the National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society) The links take you to more information on these rarer types of vasculitis. Arm of a 56-year-old woman with small vessel vasculitis (inflammation of the capillaries)  Why you should avoid smoking Smoking makes the blood vessels become even narrower than they already are, and can therefore make vasculitis symptoms worse. Get help now to stop smoking. Page last reviewed: 23\/09\/2014 Next review due: 23\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 69 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Giant cell arteritis Polymyalgia rheumatica Kawasaki disease Granulomatosis with polyangiitis Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura External links Vasculitis UK Corticosteroids Corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medicines prescribed to treat a wide range of health conditions NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vasectomy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/vasectomy-male-sterilisation.aspx","content":"Vasectomy (male sterilisation) - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Vasectomy (male sterilisation) A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is vasectomy (male sterilisation). At a glance: vasectomy   How vasectomy works   Who can have a vasectomy   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks   Common questions During a minor operation, the tubes that carry sperm from a man's testicles to the penis are cut, blocked or sealed. This prevents sperm from reaching the seminal fluid (semen), which is ejaculated from the penis during sex. There will be no sperm in the semen, so a woman's egg can't be fertilised.   Vasectomy is usually carried out under local anaesthetic, and takes about 15 minutes. At a glance: facts about vasectomy In most cases, vasectomy is more than 99% effective. Out of 2,000 men who are sterilised, one will get a woman pregnant during the rest of his lifetime. Male sterilisation is considered permanent \u2013 once it's done, you don't have to think about contraception again. You need to use contraception for at least eight weeks after the operation, because sperm stay in the tubes leading to the penis. Up to two semen tests are done after the operation, to ensure that all the sperm have gone.  Your scrotum (ball sack) may become bruised, swollen or painful \u2013 some men have ongoing pain in their testicles. As with any surgery, there's a slight risk of infection.  Reversing the operation isn't easy, and is rarely available on the NHS. Vasectomy doesn't protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using a condom, you\u2019ll protect yourself and your partner against STIs.  How vasectomy works Vasectomy works by stopping sperm from getting into a man\u2019s semen. This means that when a man ejaculates, the semen has no sperm and a woman\u2019s egg cannot be fertilised. How vasectomy is carried out  Conventional vasectomy No-scalpel vasectomy Before you decide to have a vasectomy How long will I have to wait for the operation? Recovering after the operation How will I know if the vasectomy has worked? Is reversal possible? How vasectomy is carried out Vasectomy is a quick and relatively painless surgical procedure. The tubes that carry sperm from a man's testicles to the penis are cut, blocked or sealed with heat. In most cases, you will be able to return home the same day. Most vasectomies are carried out under local anaesthetic. This means that only your scrotum and testicles will be numbed, and you will be awake for the procedure. You will not feel any pain, although it may feel slightly uncomfortable. In rare cases, a general anaesthetic may be required. This means that you will be asleep during the procedure. A general anaesthetic may be used if you are allergic to local anaesthetic or have a history of fainting easily. However, most people will only need a local anaesthetic. A vasectomy has no effect on sex drive or ability to enjoy sex. You will still have erections and ejaculate normally. The only difference is that your semen will not contain sperm.  A vasectomy can be performed at: your local GP surgery a hospital as a day-patient appointment a sexual health clinic a private clinic   There are two types of vasectomy. The traditional technique, called conventional vasectomy, involves making two small incisions in the scrotum (the pouch of skin that surrounds your testicles) using a scalpel (surgical knife). The other type, called a no-scalpel vasectomy, is a newer technique now in common use. The doctor doing your vasectomy will discuss with you which is best. Conventional vasectomy During a conventional vasectomy, the skin of your scrotum is numbed with local anaesthetic. The doctor makes two small cuts, about 1cm long, on each side of your scrotum. The incisions allow your surgeon to access the tubes that carry sperm out of your testicles. These tubes are known as \"vas deferens\". Each tube is cut and a small section removed. The ends of the tubes are then closed, either by tying them or sealing them using diathermy (an instrument that heats to a very high temperature). The incisions are stitched, usually using dissolvable stitches, which will disappear naturally within about a week. No-scalpel vasectomy You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you No-scalpel vasectomy is usually carried out under local anaesthetic. During a no-scalpel vasectomy, the doctor will feel the vas deferens underneath the skin of your scrotum and then hold them in place using a small clamp. A special instrument is then used to make a tiny puncture hole in the skin of the scrotum. A small pair of forceps is used to open up the hole, allowing the surgeon to access the vas deferens without needing to cut the skin with a scalpel. The tubes are then closed in the same way as in a conventional vasectomy, either by being tied or sealed. During a no-scalpel vasectomy, there will be little bleeding and no stitches. The procedure is also thought to be less painful and less likely to cause complications than a conventional vasectomy. Before you decide to have a vasectomy Your doctor will ask about your circumstances and provide information and counselling before agreeing to the procedure. You should only have a vasectomy if you are certain that you do not want to have any, or any more, children. If you have any doubts, consider another method of contraception until you are completely sure. You shouldn't make the decision about having a vasectomy after a crisis or a big change in your life \u2013 for example, if your partner has just had a baby, or has just terminated a pregnancy. If you have a partner, discuss it with them before deciding to have a vasectomy. If possible, you should both agree to the procedure, but it is not a legal requirement to get your partner's permission. You can have a vasectomy at any age. However, if you are under 30, particularly if you do not have children, your doctor may be reluctant to perform the procedure. Your GP does have the right to refuse to carry out the procedure or refuse to refer you for the procedure if they do not believe that it is in your best interests. If this is the case, you may have to pay to have a vasectomy privately. How long will I have to wait for the operation? In most parts of the UK, a vasectomy is available free of charge from the NHS. However, waiting lists can be several months, depending on where you live. Speak to your GP or ask at your local contraception clinic about vasectomies in your area. As waiting lists for vasectomies can be long, some men choose to pay to have the procedure carried out privately. You can request a male doctor, but in some cases this may mean having to wait longer. Your GP may be able to offer you options of where the vasectomy can be carried out. Recovering after the operation It\u2019s common to have some mild discomfort, swelling and bruising of your scrotum for a few days after the vasectomy. If you have pain or discomfort, you can take painkillers, such as paracetamol. Contact your GP for advice if you are still experiencing considerable pain after taking painkillers. It\u2019s common to have blood in your semen in the first few ejaculations after a vasectomy. This isn\u2019t harmful. Some other common questions about recovery are outlined below. Underwear Wearing close-fitting underwear, such as Y-fronts, during the day and at night will help to support your scrotum and will also help ease any discomfort or swelling. Make sure you change your underwear every day. Hygiene It is usually safe for you to have a bath or shower after your operation \u2013 check with your doctor what is suitable for you. Make sure you dry your genital area gently and thoroughly. Returning to work Most men will be fit to return to work one or two days after their vasectomy, but you should avoid sport and heavy lifting for at least one week after the operation. This is to minimise the risk of developing complications (see below). If any symptoms continue after a few days, consult your GP. Having sex You can have sex again as soon as it is comfortable to do so, although it is best to wait for a couple of days. However, you will still have sperm in your semen immediately after the operation, as it takes time to clear the remaining sperm in your tubes. It takes an average of 20-30 ejaculations to clear the tubes of sperm. You will need to use another method of contraception until you have had two clear semen tests. Once the operation has been carried out successfully and semen tests have shown that there is no sperm present, long-term partners may not need to use other forms of contraception. However, a vasectomy does not protect against HIV infection or any other STIs, so you should still use condoms with any new partner. How will I know if my vasectomy has worked? After the vasectomy, there will be some sperm left in the upper part of the vas deferens tubes. It can take more than 20 ejaculations to clear these sperm from the tubes so, during this time, there is still a risk of pregnancy. Until it has been confirmed that your semen is free of sperm, you should continue to use another form of contraception. At least eight weeks after the procedure, you will need to produce a sample of semen, which will be tested for sperm. This will also help to identify the rare cases in which the tubes naturally rejoin themselves. Once tests have confirmed that your semen is free of sperm, the vasectomy is considered successful and you can stop using additional contraception. A few men continue to have small numbers of sperm in their system, but these sperm do not move (they are known as non-motile sperm). If you are one of these men, your doctor will discuss your options with you. The chances of making your partner pregnant may be low enough to consider the vasectomy successful, or you may be advised to have further tests or consider other options. Is reversal possible? It is possible to have a vasectomy reversed. However, the procedure is not always successful. You have a better chance if it is done soon after the vasectomy. If a reversal is carried out within 10 years of your vasectomy, the success rate is about 55%. This falls to 25% if your reversal is carried out more than 10 years after your vasectomy. Even if a surgeon manages to join up the vas deferens tubes again, pregnancy may still not be possible. This is why you should be certain before going ahead with the vasectomy. Your doctor can help you to make your decision. Reversal is rarely available on the NHS and the operation can be expensive if done privately. Who can have a vasectomy Having a vasectomy should always be viewed as permanent sterilisation. This is because, although reversal is sometimes possible, it may not be successful. A reversal operation requires delicate microsurgery to join the tubes together again. Even with a successful operation, it still may not be possible to father a child. Advantages and disadvantages of vasectomy Advantages The failure rate is only one in 2,000 \u2013 out of 2,000 men who have a vasectomy, only one will get a woman pregnant in the rest of his lifetime. There are rarely long-term effects on your health. Vasectomy does not affect your hormone levels or sex drive. It will not affect the spontaneity of sex or interfere with sex. Vasectomy may be chosen as a simpler, safer and more reliable alternative to female sterilisation. Disadvantages Vasectomy doesn\u2019t protect against STIs It\u2019s difficult to reverse, and reversal may not be available on the NHS. You need to use contraception after the operation until tests show your semen is free of sperm \u2013 if your semen contains sperm, you could make your partner pregnant. Complications can occur \u2013 the risks are listed below. Risks Most men feel sore and tender for a few days after the operation, and will usually experience some bruising and swelling on or around their scrotum. However, in some cases, a vasectomy can cause more serious problems, some of which are outlined below. Haematoma A haematoma is when blood collects and clots in the tissue surrounding a broken blood vessel. Following a vasectomy, you may develop a haematoma inside your scrotum. Haematomas are mostly small (pea-sized), but can occasionally be large (filling the scrotum) and, rarely, they can be very large. This can cause your scrotum to become very swollen and painful. In severe cases, you may need further surgery to treat the blood clot. Sperm granulomas When the tubes that carry sperm from your testicles are cut, sperm can sometimes leak from them. In rare cases, sperm can collect in the surrounding tissue, forming hard lumps that are known as sperm granulomas. Your groin or scrotum may become painful and swollen either immediately or a few months after the procedure. The lumps are not usually painful and can often be treated using anti-inflammatory medication, which your GP will prescribe. If the granulomas are particularly large or painful, they may have to be surgically removed. Infection After a vasectomy, you may be at risk of developing an infection as a result of bacteria entering through the cuts made in your scrotum. Therefore, after the operation, it is important to keep your genital area clean and dry to keep the risk of infection as low as you can. Long-term testicle pain Some men get pain in one or both of their testicles after a vasectomy. It can happen immediately, a few months or a few years after the operation. It may be occasional or quite frequent, and vary from a constant dull ache to episodes of sharp, intense pain. For most men, however, any pain is quite mild and they do not need further help for it. Long-term testicular pain affects around one in 10 men after vasectomy. The pain is usually the result of a pinched nerve or scarring that occurred during the operation. You may be advised to undergo further surgery to repair the damage and to help minimise further pain. Testicles feeling full After a vasectomy, some men may develop the sensation that their testicles are \"fuller\" than normal. This is usually caused by the epididymis becoming filled with stored sperm. The epididymis is the long, coiled tube that rests on the back of each testicle. It helps to transport and store sperm. Any such feelings should pass naturally within a few weeks. However, speak to your GP if you are still experiencing fullness after this time. Fertility In a very small number of vasectomy cases, the vas deferens reconnects over a period of time. This means that the vasectomy will no longer be an effective form of contraception. However, it is rare for this to happen. Common questions about vasectomy Can I have the operation if I am single? Yes, but if you are under 30 you will find that many surgeons are reluctant to do it, in case your circumstances change and you regret it later. Will it affect my sex drive? No. After a successful vasectomy, your testicles will continue to produce the male hormone (testosterone) just as they did before the procedure. Your sex drive, sensation and ability to have an erection won\u2019t be affected. The only difference is that there will be no sperm in your semen. Your body still produces sperm, but they are absorbed without harm. Could being sterile affect me emotionally? It is a big decision to end the part of your life where you could father a child. This is another reason to think it over carefully. If you are sure about your decision to have a vasectomy, you may feel relieved that the worry of possible pregnancy is over and you do not need to think about contraception again. If you feel anxious or uncomfortable about the procedure, or if you think you would suffer mentally from being infertile, then it is not the best type of contraception for you. You can discuss alternatives with your GP or with a professional at a contraception clinic (sometimes called a family planning clinic). Is there any risk of vasectomy causing cancer? Although prostate cancer and testicular cancer can occur in men who have had a vasectomy, research suggests that vasectomy does not increase your risk of cancer. Can I use IVF to father a child? If you have a vasectomy, and then decide later that you want a child, there may be the option of doing so by IVF (in vitro fertilisation). To do this, a surgeon would retrieve sperm from your testicles and use this to fertilise your partner\u2019s egg. However: IVF may not be available on the NHS IVF done privately can be expensive  IVF is not always successful Can I store sperm in a sperm bank, just in case? You could but, as with IVF, sperm stored in a sperm bank cannot be relied on to bring about a pregnancy. It can also be expensive. Where to get contraception Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. You can get contraception, and information and advice about contraception, at: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse  community contraception clinics  some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics  sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraception and STI testing services  some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.  Page last reviewed: 13\/01\/2015 Next review due: 13\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 665 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 240  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 237  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Community content from HealthUnlocked Related articles Female sterilisation External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for young people Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Vasectomy reversal is not guaranteed to work and is not always available on the NHS Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A vasectomy is an operation to cause sterility in men. A consultant surgeon explains what the procedure involves and why you should use contraception for three months after the operation. Media last reviewed: 11\/06\/2015 Next review due: 11\/06\/2017 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vegetarian health","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/vegetarianhealth\/Pages\/Vegetarianhealthhome.aspx","content":"Vegetarian and vegan diets - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vegetarian and vegan diets Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Vegetarian and vegan diets Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Healthy eating for vegetarians and vegans Advice on healthy vegetarian and vegan diets to ensure you have a balanced and varied diet that includes essential nutrients. The vegetarian diet A guide to help vegetarians eat the right proportions from different food groups to get a balanced diet. The vegan diet How to be healthy on a vegan diet, including sources of vitamin B12, calcium, vitamin D and iron. Vegetarian and vegan diets Q&A Answers to some common questions about how to stay healthy on a vegetarian or vegan diet. Vegetarian food on a budget Advice for vegetarians and vegans on keeping the costs down when shopping for food. Vegetarian and vegan mums-to-be Healthy eating advice for vegetarians and vegans during pregnancy and while breastfeeding. 'I feel healthier as a vegan' David Scott talks about his decision to become a vegan and how he makes sure his diet is balanced and varied. How to wash fruit and vegetables How to store, wash and prepare fruit and vegetables to prevent food poisoning, including E. coli. Tips for growing your own fruit and vegetables Find out how growing your own fruit and veg can help you get your 5 A DAY, and get tips from other gardeners. Hearty vegetable soup Packed with tomatoes, celery, carrots and beans, this is a great option to include more vegetables in your diet. What are superfoods? We examine the evidence behind the health claims about 10 popular \"superfoods\". How much is 5 A DAY? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Exactly how much is one portion of fruit or vegetables? Dietitian Azmina Govindji explains Media last reviewed: 11\/07\/2015 Next review due: 11\/07\/2017 Quick nutrition links The Eatwell Guide Fruit and vegetables Starchy foods Milk and dairy foods Eggs Beans and pulses Fats Sugars Salt Drinks Vitamins and minerals Tools BMI healthy weight calculator Check your BMI and get tailored advice Food allergies self-assessment Find out if you have a food allergy Change4Life Sugar Swaps app Scan a product's barcode to see how many sugar cubes it contains Vegetarian and vegan children How to give vegetarian or vegan children all the energy and nutrients they need, including protein, calcium, vitamin B12 and omega-3 How to have a balanced diet A healthy diet contains food from the five major food groups to give us the energy and nutrients we need 5 A DAY Whether you're cooking for a family or eating on the run, our tips and recipes can help you get your 5 A DAY NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vegetative state","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Vegetative-state","content":"Disorders of consciousness - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Disorders of consciousness  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vegetative-state Clinical trials Vegetative-state Disorders of consciousness Vegetative-state Causes Vegetative-state Diagnosis Introduction  A disorder of consciousness, or impaired consciousness, is a state where consciousness has been affected by damage to the brain. Consciousness requires both wakefulness and awareness. Wakefulness is the ability to open your eyes and have basic reflexes such as coughing, swallowing and sucking. Awareness is associated with more complex thought processes and is more difficult to assess. Currently, the assessment of awareness relies on physical responses being detected during an examination. The main disorders of consciousness are: coma vegetative state minimally conscious state Coma A coma is when a person shows no signs of being awake and no signs of being aware. A person in a coma lies with their eyes closed and doesn't respond to their environment, voices or pain. A coma usually lasts for less than two to four weeks, during which time a person may wake up or progress into a vegetative state or minimally conscious state. Read more about comas. Vegetative state A vegetative state is when a person is awake but is showing no signs of awareness. A person in a vegetative state may open their eyes, wake up and fall asleep at regular intervals and have basic reflexes, such as blinking when they're startled by a loud noise, or withdrawing their hand when it's squeezed hard. They're also able to regulate their heartbeat and breathing without assistance. However, a person in a vegetative state doesn't show any meaningful responses, such as following an object with their eyes or responding to voices. They also show no signs of experiencing emotions. If a person is in a vegetative state for a long time, it may be considered to be: a continuing vegetative state \u2013 when it's been longer than four weeks a permanent vegetative state \u2013 when it's been more than six months if caused by a non-traumatic brain injury, or more than 12 months if caused by a traumatic brain injury If a person is diagnosed as being in a permanent vegetative state, recovery is extremely unlikely but not impossible. Minimally conscious state A person who shows clear but minimal or inconsistent awareness is classified as being in a minimally conscious state. They may have periods where they can communicate or respond to commands, such as moving a finger when asked. A person may enter a minimally conscious state after being in a coma or vegetative state. In some cases a minimally conscious state is a stage on the route to recovery, but in others it's permanent. As with vegetative state, a continuing minimally conscious state means it has lasted longer than four weeks. However, it's more difficult to diagnose a permanent minimally conscious state because it depends on things such as: the type of brain injury how severe the injury is how responsive the person is In most cases, a minimally conscious state isn't usually considered to be permanent until it's lasted several years. Why they happen Disorders of consciousness can occur if the parts of the brain involved with consciousness are damaged. These types of brain injury can be divided into: traumatic brain injury \u2013 the result of a severe head injury, such as an injury sustained during a car accident or a fall from a great height non-traumatic brain injury \u2013 where the injury to the brain is caused by a health condition, such as a stroke progressive brain damage \u2013 where the brain is gradually damaged over time; for example, because of Alzheimer's disease Read more about the causes of disorders of consciousness. Making a diagnosis A disorder of consciousness will only be confirmed after extensive testing to determine the person's level of wakefulness and awareness. These examinations need to be carried out by someone experienced in disorders of consciousness, although the views of other healthcare professionals and family members should also be taken into consideration. For some states of impaired consciousness, such as vegetative state and minimally conscious state, there are recommended criteria to help confirm a diagnosis. Read more about diagnosing disorders of consciousness. Treatment and care Treatment can't ensure recovery from a state of impaired consciousness. Instead, supportive treatment is used to give the best chance of natural improvement. This can involve: providing nutrition through a feeding tube  making sure the person is moved regularly so they don't develop pressure ulcers gently exercising their joints to prevent them becoming tight keeping their skin clean managing their bowel and bladder \u2013 for example, using a tube known as a catheter to drain the bladder keeping their teeth and mouth clean offering opportunities for periods of meaningful activity \u2013 such as listening to music or watching television, being shown pictures or hearing family members talking Sensory stimulation In some cases, a treatment called sensory stimulation may be used in an attempt to increase responsiveness. This involves stimulating the main senses, such as vision, hearing and smell. It's usually carried out by a trained specialist, but family members are often encouraged to be involved. Some examples of sensory stimulation include: visual \u2013 showing photos of friends and family, or a favourite film hearing \u2013 talking or playing a favourite song smell \u2013 putting flowers in the room or spraying a favourite perfume touch \u2013 holding their hand or stroking their skin with different fabrics It's not entirely clear how effective sensory stimulation is, but it's sometimes considered worthwhile.  Recovery It's impossible to predict the chances of someone in a state of impaired consciousness improving. It largely depends on: the type of brain injury how severe the injury is the person's age how long they've been in the state for Some people improve gradually, whereas others stay in a state of impaired consciousness for years. Many people never recover consciousness. There are only isolated cases of people recovering consciousness after several years. The few people who do regain consciousness after this time often have severe disabilities caused by the damage to their brain. Withdrawing nutritional support If a person has been in a vegetative state for a minimum of 12 months, it may be recommended that nutritional support is withdrawn. This is because: there's almost no chance of a recovery by this point prolonging life would have no benefit for the person concerned prolonging treatment could offer false hope and cause unnecessary emotional distress for the friends and family of the person concerned The medical team will discuss the issue with family members, but the decision has to be referred to the courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland before any further action can be taken. In Scotland a court ruling isn't required, but is often sought. If the court agrees with the decision, a palliative care team will usually be involved in planning the withdrawal. Once nutritional support is eventually withdrawn, the person will die within a few days or weeks. Locked-in syndrome Locked-in syndrome has similar features to disorders of consciousness, but is considered and treated differently.  A person with locked-in syndrome is both conscious and aware, but completely paralysed and unable to speak. They're usually able to move their eyes and are sometimes able to communicate by blinking. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/09\/2015 Next review due: 23\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 82 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bereavement Coma End of life care End of life issues Severe head injury External links Headway UK: coma and reduced awareness states healthtalk.org: family experiences of vegetative and minimally conscious states National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS): coma information Bereavement Information and real stories about coping with different types of bereavement Coma Find out about comas, a state of unconsciousness where a person is unresponsive and cannot be woken up NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Venous leg ulcer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leg-ulcer-venous","content":"Venous leg ulcer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Venous leg ulcer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leg-ulcer-venous Clinical trials Venous leg ulcer Leg-ulcer-venous Symptoms Leg-ulcer-venous Causes Leg-ulcer-venous Diagnosis Leg-ulcer-venous Treatment Leg-ulcer-venous Prevention Introduction  A leg ulcer is a long-lasting (chronic) sore that takes more than four to six weeks to heal. They usually develop on the inside of the leg, just above the ankle. The symptoms of a venous leg ulcer include pain, itching and swelling in the affected leg. There may also be discoloured or hardened skin around the ulcer, and the sore may produce a foul-smelling discharge. See your GP if you think you have a leg ulcer, as it will need specialist treatment to help it heal. Your GP will examine your leg and may carry out additional tests to rule out other conditions. Read more about how a venous leg ulcer is diagnosed. What causes venous leg ulcers? A venous leg ulcer is the most common type of leg ulcer, accounting for over 90% of all cases. Venous leg ulcers can develop after a minor injury, where persistently high pressure in the veins of the legs has damaged the skin. Read more about the causes of venous leg ulcers. Who's affected? Venous leg ulcers are estimated to affect around 1 in 500 people in the UK, although they become much more common with age. It's estimated that around 1 in 50 people over the age of 80 has one. You're more at risk of developing one if you've previously had deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or find it difficult to walk because of a problem such as: osteoarthritis a leg injury obesity paralysis You're also more at risk if you've recently had an operation on your leg, such as a hip replacement or knee replacement. People with varicose veins (swollen and enlarged veins) also have a higher risk of developing venous leg ulcers. How venous leg ulcers are treated Most venous leg ulcers heal within three to four months if they're treated by a healthcare professional trained in compression therapy for leg ulcers. However, some ulcers may take longer to heal, and a very small number never heal. Treatment usually involves: cleaning and dressing the wound using compression, such as bandages or stockings, to improve the flow of blood in the legs Antibiotics may also be used if the ulcer becomes infected, but they don't help ulcers to heal. However, unless the underlying cause of the ulcer is addressed, there's a high risk of a venous leg ulcer recurring after treatment. Underlying causes could include immobility, obesity, previous DVT, or varicose veins. Read more about treating venous leg ulcers. Can venous leg ulcers be prevented? There are several ways to help prevent a venous leg ulcer in people at risk, such as:  wearing compression stockings losing weight if you're overweight exercising regularly elevating your leg when possible This is particularly important if you've previously had a leg ulcer \u2013 once a leg has suffered a venous ulcer, you're at risk of further ulcers developing within months or years. Read more about preventing venous leg ulcers. Other types of leg ulcer Other common types of leg ulcer include: arterial leg ulcers \u2013 caused by poor blood circulation in the arteries diabetic leg ulcers \u2013 caused by the high blood sugar associated with diabetes vasculitic leg ulcers \u2013 associated with chronic inflammatory disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus traumatic leg ulcers \u2013 caused by injury to the leg malignant leg ulcers \u2013 caused by a tumour of the skin of the leg Most ulcers caused by artery disease or diabetes occur on the foot rather than the leg. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2016 Next review due: 02\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 346 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Varicose veins Deep vein thrombosis Hypertension Oedema Varicose eczema External links British Association of Dermatologists Circulation Foundation The Lindsay Leg Club Foundation Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Venous thromboembolism (VTE)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thrombosis","content":"Blood clots - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blood clots  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrombosis Clinical trials Blood clots Introduction  Every year, thousands of people in the UK develop a blood clot in a vein. It's known as venous thromboembolism (VTE) and is a serious, potentially fatal, medical condition. VTE is the collective name for: deep vein thrombosis (DVT) \u2013 a blood clot in in one of the deep veins in the body, usually in one of the legs pulmonary embolism \u2013 a blood clot in the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the lungs Although serious, most blood clots can be completely avoided. The key is to be aware if you're at risk and take some simple preventative steps. This article is about blood clots in veins. If you want information on blood clots in arteries, which is a common cause of heart attack and stroke, see the topic on arterial thrombosis. Who gets blood clots? Anyone can get a blood clot, but you're more at risk if you can\u2019t move around much or if you\u2019re unwell. You\u2019ve probably heard of blood clots linked to long-haul plane journeys or the contraceptive pill, but most blood clots actually develop during or just after a stay in hospital. Your risk is also increased if you: are over 60 years old are overweight or obese have had a blood clot before are having hormone replacement therapy (HRT) are pregnant or have recently given birth are dehydrated have cancer or are having cancer treatment have a condition that causes your blood to clot more easily than normal, such as antiphospholipid syndrome The rest of this topic will focus on blood clots linked with admission to hospital. Hospital-acquired blood clots In 2005, a House of Commons Health Committee report stated that every year in England an estimated 25,000 deaths occur as a result of hospital-acquired VTE. The report also stated that the estimated number of deaths due to VTE, \"is more than the combined total of deaths from breast cancer, AIDS and traffic accidents, and more than 25 times the number who die from MRSA\". The government recognises that deaths from hospital blood clots are preventable and has recommended that all patients admitted to hospital should be assessed for their risk of developing blood clots, and measures to reduce this risk should be taken when appropriate. Assessing your risk of blood clots When you arrive at hospital, you should be checked for your risk of blood clots. Hospital staff will record your age and weight and ask you about your general health. The assessment will also take into account the reason for your hospital stay. Your risk of clots is likely to be higher, for instance, if you're having a major operation, if you're going to be confined to bed for long periods, or if you have any of the other \"risk factors\" mentioned above. If the assessment shows that you're at risk of a blood clot, you should be offered preventative treatment. The options include blood-thinning medication (anticoagulants) and compression stockings or foot pumps to keep your blood circulating and help prevent any clots forming. Hospital staff should check whether bleeding might be a problem before offering medication to help prevent clots. If you've been admitted to hospital and you haven't had your blood clot risk checked, it's important that you ask a doctor or nurse. Equally, if you've been told you're at risk of clots and have been given medicine, stockings or other devices, it's important that you understand how to use them properly. Don't be afraid to ask hospital staff about reducing your risk of blood clots \u2013 it could save your life. Questions you might like to ask your healthcare team about blood clots are: am I at risk of blood clots? how likely am I to have bleeding problems? what happens if I have problems with a medication or treatment I am having to help prevent clots? Reducing your risk of blood clots There are things you and the medical professionals looking after you can do before, during and after your hospital stay to minimise your risk of developing a blood clot. Before coming into hospital You can help yourself before coming into hospital by: trying to lose any excess weight keeping as mobile as you can talking to your doctor if you take HRT or the combined contraceptive pill \u2013 you may need to stop them a few weeks before your operation While in hospital While you're in hospital, you will reduce your chances of a blood clot if you: drink plenty of fluids to keep hydrated wear your compression stockings day and night (except when you're washing) wear any other compression devices you've been given take any blood-thinning medicines you've been offered get up and move around as soon as you're advised to After leaving hospital You're still at risk of developing a blood clot in the days and weeks after leaving hospital, so you might be advised to continue preventative measures for a short period. Your care team will discuss this with you before you are discharged. You may be given compression stockings to wear until you are fully mobile, and you may need to keep using anticoagulants for several weeks. You should also take care to stay as mobile as possible and keep yourself well hydrated. How to tell if you have a blood clot Before leaving hospital, you should be told about anything you need to look out for that could suggest you've developed a blood clot. Symptoms of a blood clot can include: cramping pain, redness, warmth, or swelling in one of your legs \u2013 these are symptoms of DVT breathlessness, chest pain, fainting or coughing up blood \u2013 these are symptoms of a pulmonary embolism If you develop symptoms of a blood clot, see your GP or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible. Blood clots can be treated if they're spotted in time. Read more about treating blood clots. Page last reviewed: 04\/02\/2015 Next review due: 04\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 367 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 128  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_71\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Arterial thrombosis Deep vein thrombosis Going into hospital Pulmonary embolism External links CLOT NICE: reducing VTE risk The National VTE Prevention Programme Thrombosis Research Institute VTE: Paul's story Ex-England goalkeeper Paul Robinson developed a blood clot after being admitted to hospital for a routine operation VTE: a guide for professionals This video offers guidance for health professionals on how to manage VTE NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Verrucas and warts","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Warts","content":"Warts and verrucas - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Warts and verrucas  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Warts Clinical trials Warts Community Warts and verrucas Warts Symptoms Warts Causes Warts Treatment Warts Prevention Introduction  Warts are small lumps that often develop on the skin of the hands and feet. Warts vary in appearance and may develop singly or in clusters. Some are more likely to affect particular areas of the body. For example, verrucas are warts that usually develop on the soles of the feet. Warts are non-cancerous, but can resemble certain cancers. Most people will have warts at some point in their life. They tend to affect children and teenagers more than adults. Read more about the symptoms of warts. What causes warts? Warts are caused by an infection with the human papilloma virus (HPV). The virus causes an excess amount of keratin, a hard protein, to develop in the top skin layer (epidermis). The extra keratin produces the rough, hard texture of a wart. Read more about the causes of warts. Are warts contagious? Warts aren't considered very contagious, but they can be caught by close skin-to-skin contact. The infection can also be transmitted indirectly from contaminated objects or surfaces, such as the area surrounding a swimming pool. You are more likely to get infected if your skin is wet or damaged. After you become infected, it can take weeks or even months for a wart or verruca to appear. When to see your GP Most types of warts are easy to identify because they have a distinctive appearance. You should always see your GP if you have a growth on your skin you are unable to identify or are worried about. Your GP will be able to tell if it's a wart simply by looking at it. Where it is on your body and how it affects surrounding skin will also be taken into consideration. You should visit your GP if you have a wart that: bleeds changes in appearance spreads causes you significant pain, distress or embarrassment Treating warts Most warts are harmless and clear up without treatment. The length of time it takes a wart to disappear will vary from person to person. It may take up to two years for the viral infection to leave your system and for the wart to disappear. You might decide to treat your wart if it is painful, or in an area that is causing discomfort or embarrassment. Common methods of treatment include: salicylic acid cryotherapy (freezing the skin cells) duct tape chemical treatments Treatment for warts is not always completely effective, and a wart will sometimes return following treatment. Surgery is not usually recommended for warts. Read more about how warts are treated. Warts are small non-cancerous lumps that often appear on the hands and feet  Genital warts Genital warts are small, fleshy growths that develop around the genital or anal area. In England, genital warts are the most common viral sexually transmitted infection (STI). Like other types of warts, genital warts are caused by the human papilloma virus (HPV). They can be spread during sex. Read more about genital warts. Page last reviewed: 11\/09\/2014 Next review due: 11\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 543 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 161  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Foot health Skin care Genital warts Find foot health services External links British Association of Dermatologists: verrucas (PDF, 227kb) British Association of Dermatologists: cryotherapy (PDF, 262kb) College of Podiatry: verrucas Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vertigo","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Vertigo","content":"Vertigo - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vertigo  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vertigo Clinical trials Vertigo Vertigo Causes Vertigo Diagnosis Vertigo Treatment Introduction  Vertigo is a symptom, rather than a condition itself. It's the sensation that you, or the environment around you, is moving or spinning. This feeling may be barely noticeable, or it may be so severe that you find it difficult to keep your balance and do everyday tasks. Attacks of vertigo can develop suddenly and last for a few seconds, or they may last much longer. If you have severe vertigo, your symptoms may be constant and last for several days, making normal life very difficult. Other symptoms associated with vertigo may include: loss of balance \u2013 which can make it difficult to stand or walk feeling sick or being sick dizziness  Seeking medical help You should see you GP if you have persistent signs of vertigo or it keeps coming back. Your GP will ask about your symptoms and can carry out a simple examination to help determine some types of vertigo. They may also refer you for further tests. Read more about diagnosing vertigo. What causes vertigo? Vertigo is commonly caused by a problem with the way balance works in the inner ear, although it can also be caused by problems in certain parts of the brain. Causes of vertigo may include: benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) \u2013 where certain head movements trigger vertigo migraines \u2013 severe headaches labyrinthitis \u2013 an inner ear infection vestibular neuronitis \u2013 inflammation of the vestibular nerve, which runs into the inner ear and sends messages to the brain that help to control balance Depending on the condition causing vertigo, you may experience additional symptoms, such as a high temperature, ringing in your ears (tinnitus) and hearing loss. Read more about the causes of vertigo. How is vertigo treated? Some cases of vertigo improve over time, without treatment. However, some people have repeated episodes for many months, or even years, such as those with Ménière's disease. There are specific treatments for some causes of vertigo. A series of simple head movements (known as the Epley manoeuvre) is used to treat BPPV. Medicines, such as prochlorperazine and some antihistamines, can help in the early stages or most cases of vertigo. Many people with vertigo also benefit from vestibular rehabilitation training (VRT), which is a series of exercises for people with dizziness and balance problems.   Read more about treating vertigo. Self care Depending on what's causing your vertigo, there may be things you can do yourself to help relieve your symptoms. Your GP or the specialist treating you may advise you to: do simple exercises to correct your symptoms sleep with your head slightly raised on two or more pillows get up slowly when getting out of bed and sit on the edge of the bed for a minute or so before standing avoid bending down to pick up items avoid extending your neck \u2013 for example, while reaching up to a high shelf move your head carefully and slowly during daily activities do exercises that trigger your vertigo, so your brain gets used to it and reduces the symptoms (do these only after making sure you won't fall, and have support if needed) Fear of heights The term vertigo is often incorrectly used to describe a fear of heights. The medical term for a fear of heights and the dizzy feeling associated with looking down from a high place is \"acrophobia\". Read more about phobias for advice and information. JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 11\/02\/2015 Next review due: 11\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1221 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 553  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 372  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 145  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acoustic neuroma Labyrinthitis Ménière's disease Migraine Vestibular neuronitis Tinnitus External links Action on Hearing Loss: protect your hearing Brain & Spine Foundation: dizziness and balance problems Ménière's Society Hearing problems How to protect your hearing, with tips on spotting when you're going deaf, getting tested and hearing aids Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vestibular neuronitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vestibular-neuronitis","content":"Vestibular neuronitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vestibular neuronitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Vestibular neuronitis, or neuritis, is an infection of the vestibular nerve in the inner ear. It causes the vestibular nerve to become inflamed, disrupting your sense of balance. The term labyrinthitis is often used to describe the same condition. However, people with labyrinthitis usually experience hearing loss as well as balance problems and dizziness. In most cases, the symptoms of vestibular neuronitis pass within a few weeks. Treatment usually involves a combination of bed rest and medication at the start, followed by a gradual return to activity. This topics covers: Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Treatment Chronic vestibular neuronitis Symptoms of vestibular neuronitis The most common symptoms of vestibular neuronitis are dizziness and vertigo \u2013 the sensation that you, or everything around you, is moving. This may cause you to feel nauseous or be sick, have difficulty concentrating and blurred vision. These symptoms can range from mild to severe, with some people feeling that they\u2019re unable to remain upright for the first few days. In most cases, the symptoms appear suddenly during the day or when you wake up in the morning. After a few days, you can usually start moving around, but will feel dizzy and easily tired. Even after a few weeks, you may feel some dizziness when being active, particularly away from your home. See your GP if you have these symptoms. You should also avoid driving, using tools and machinery, or working at heights if you're feeling dizzy. Causes of vestibular neuronitis The vestibular nerve usually becomes inflamed because of a viral infection, which may have started with a sore throat, cold or flu. Vestibular neuronitis can also be caused by a bacterial infection, such as a middle ear infection or meningitis, although this is much less common. Bacteria can also get into your inner ear if you have a head injury. Diagnosing vestibular neuronitis Many conditions can cause dizziness and vertigo. Your GP will usually diagnose vestibular neuronitis based on your symptoms, your medical history and a physical examination. You may be asked to move your head or body, and your ears will be checked for signs of inflammation and infection. Your GP will also check your eyes. If they\u2019re flickering uncontrollably, it\u2019s usually a sign that your vestibular system (the body's balancing system) isn\u2019t working properly. You may be referred to hospital if: your GP suspects a more serious condition, such as a middle ear infection or meningitis the condition isn't showing signs of settling after three to four weeks you also have hearing loss Treating vestibular neuronitis The symptoms of vestibular neuronitis usually settle over a few weeks, even without treatment. However, there are some self-help measures you can take to reduce the severity of your symptoms and help your recovery. Medication doesn't speed up your recovery, but may be prescribed to help reduce the severity of your symptoms. Self-help for vestibular neuronitis If you're feeling nauseous, drink plenty of water to avoid becoming dehydrated. It's best to drink little and often. If you have quite severe vertigo and dizziness, you should rest in bed to avoid falling and injuring yourself. After a few days, the worst of these symptoms should have passed and you should no longer feel dizzy all the time. You can do several things to minimise any remaining feelings of dizziness and vertigo. For example: avoid alcohol avoid bright lights try to cut out noise and anything that causes stress from your surroundings You should also avoid driving, using tools and machinery, or working at heights if you're feeling dizzy and unbalanced. Once the dizziness is starting to settle, you should gradually increase your activities around your home. You should start to have walks outside as soon as possible. It may help to be accompanied by someone, who may even hold your arm until you become confident. You won't make your condition worse by trying to be active, although it may make you feel dizzy. While you're recovering, it may help to avoid visually distracting environments such as: supermarkets shopping centres busy roads These can cause feelings of dizziness, because you're moving your eyes around a lot. It can help to keep your eyes fixed on objects, rather than looking around all the time. Once you're over the worst phase of the illness, physical activity helps you recover, even though it will be unpleasant at first. Medication for vestibular neuronitis Your GP may prescribe medication for severe symptoms, such as: a benzodiazepine \u2013 which reduces activity inside your central nervous system, making your brain less likely to be affected by the abnormal signals coming from your vestibular system an antiemetic \u2013 which can help with symptoms of nausea and vomiting antibiotics \u2013 if your vestibular neuronitis is thought to be caused by a bacterial infection Check the patient information leaflet that comes with your medication for a full list of possible side effects. Chronic vestibular neuronitis A small number of people experience dizziness and vertigo for months or even years. This is sometimes known as chronic vestibular neuronitis. It happens when the vestibular nerve fails to recover and the balance organs can't get messages through to your brain properly. The symptoms aren\u2019t usually as severe as when you first get the condition, although even mild dizziness can have a considerable impact on your quality of life, employment and other daily activities. Vestibular rehabilitation therapy (VRT) VRT is an effective treatment for people with chronic vestibular neuronitis. VRT attempts to \"retrain\" your brain and nervous system to compensate for the abnormal signals coming from your vestibular system. VRT is usually carried out under the supervision of a physiotherapist and involves a range of exercises designed to: co-ordinate your hand and eye movements stimulate sensations of dizziness, so your brain starts to get used to disruptive signals sent by your vestibular system and then ignores them improve your balance and walking ability improve your strength and fitness The Brain and Spine Foundation is a UK charity that has more information about vestibular rehabilitation on its website. You can ask your GP to refer you to a physiotherapist or you can pay for private treatment. If you decide to see a private physiotherapist, make sure they are fully qualified and a member of a recognised body, such as the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy (CSP). The Physio First website lists qualified members, so you can find a private physio in your area. Not all physiotherapists have training in VRT, so you need to make it clear that you require this type of treatment before making an appointment. Page last reviewed: 23\/06\/2016 Next review due: 23\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 18 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Labyrinthitis Dizziness Vertigo External links Vestibular Disorders Association Brain & Spine Foundation: dizziness and balance problems Brain & Spine Foundation: vestibular rehabilitation exercises Dizziness Dizziness is a common symptom that\u2019s not usually a sign of anything serious, but it should be checked out by a doctor Vertigo Vertigo is the sensation that you, or the environment around you, is moving or spinning NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vestibular schwannoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Acoustic-neuroma","content":"Acoustic neuroma (vestibular schwannoma) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Acoustic neuroma (vestibular schwannoma)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Acoustic-neuroma Clinical trials Acoustic-neuroma Community Acoustic neuroma   An acoustic neuroma is a type of non-cancerous (benign) brain tumour. It's also known as a vestibular schwannoma. A benign brain tumour is a growth in the brain that usually grows slowly over many years and doesn't spread to other parts of the body. Acoustic neuromas grow on the nerve used for hearing and balance, which can cause problems such as hearing loss and unsteadiness. They can sometimes be serious if they become very large, but most are picked up and treated before they reach this stage. Acoustic neuromas tend to affect adults aged 30-60 and usually have no obvious cause, although a small number of cases are the result of a genetic condition called neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). This page covers: Symptoms of an acoustic neuroma Getting medical advice Treatments for acoustic neuromas Outlook for acoustic neuromas Symptoms of an acoustic neuroma An acoustic neuroma may not cause any obvious symptoms at first. Any symptoms tend to develop gradually and often include: hearing loss, which usually only affects one ear tinnitus (hearing sounds that come from inside the body) vertigo (the sensation that you're moving or spinning) A large acoustic neuroma can also sometimes cause: persistent headaches temporary blurred or double vision numbness, pain or weakness on one side of the face problems with limb co-ordination (ataxia) on one side of the body a hoarse voice or difficulty swallowing Getting medical advice See your GP if you have persistent or troublesome symptoms that you're worried could be caused by an acoustic neuroma. Acoustic neuromas can be difficult to diagnose because the symptoms can be caused by other conditions, such as Ménière's disease. If your GP thinks you could have an acoustic neuroma, you'll be referred to a hospital or clinic for further tests, such as: hearing tests to check for hearing problems and determine whether they're caused by a problem with your nerves a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, which uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to produce a detailed picture of the inside of your head a computerised tomography (CT) scan, which uses a series of X-rays to create a detailed image of the inside of your head Treatments for acoustic neuromas There are several different treatment options for an acoustic neuroma, depending on the size and position of your tumour, how fast it's growing and your general health. The main options are: monitoring the tumour \u2013 small tumours often just need to be monitored with regular MRI scans, and the treatments below are generally only recommended if scans show it's getting bigger brain surgery \u2013 surgery to remove the tumour through a cut in the skull may be carried out under general anaesthetic if it's large or getting bigger stereotactic radiosurgery \u2013 small tumours, or any pieces of a larger tumour that remain after surgery, may be treated with a precise beam of radiation to stop them getting any bigger All these options carry some risks. For example, surgery and radiosurgery can sometimes cause facial numbness or paralysis (an inability to move part of your face). Speak to your specialist about the best option for you and what the benefits and risks are. Outlook for acoustic neuromas Large acoustic neuromas can be serious because they can sometimes cause a life-threatening build-up of fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus). However, it's rare for them to reach this stage. Many grow very slowly or not at all, and those that grow more quickly can be treated before they become too big. Even with treatment, symptoms such as hearing loss and tinnitus can persist and affect your ability to work, communicate and\/or drive. These problems may need additional treatment \u2013 read more about treating hearing loss and treating tinnitus. An acoustic neuroma can occasionally return after treatment. This is thought to happen to around 1 in every 20 people who have had surgical removal. You will probably continue having regular MRI scans after any treatment, to check if the tumour is growing again or coming back. Information about you If you have an acoustic neuroma, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 11\/04\/2016 Next review due: 11\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 246 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hearing loss Tinnitus Vertigo External links Action on Hearing Loss: acoustic neuroma forum British Acoustic Neuroma Association Hearing LINK Macmillan Cancer Support: acoustic neuromas Hearing problems How to protect your hearing, with tips on spotting when you're going deaf, getting tested and hearing aids Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vision loss","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Visual-impairment","content":"Blindness and vision loss - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blindness and vision loss  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Visual-impairment Clinical trials Blindness and vision loss Information and advice for people with vision loss  In the UK, there are almost 2 million people living with sight loss. Of these, around 360,000 are registered as blind or partially sighted. Being told you have a visual impairment that can't be treated can be difficult to come to terms with. Some people go through a process similar to bereavement, where they experience a range of emotions including shock, anger, and denial, before eventually coming to accept their condition. If you're blind or partially sighted, you may be referred to a specialist low-vision clinic, which is often located within a hospital. Staff at the clinic can help you understand your condition and come to terms with your diagnosis. They can also advise you about practical things, such as lighting and vision aids, and let you know about further sources of help and support. Ask your local hospital if they have an Eye Clinic Liaison Officer (ECLO), whose role involves providing support to people with vision loss in eye clinics. Support groups If you're blind or partially sighted, you may find it helpful to contact a support group for people with vision loss. Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) The Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) is the UK\u2019s leading charity for people with vision loss, and it has a useful page on its website about coming to terms with sight loss. The RNIB's helpline is open Monday to Friday from 8.45am to 5.30pm. The number is 0303 123 9999, with calls costing no more than a standard rate call to an 01 or 02 number. You can also email helpline staff (helpline@rnib.org.uk). The RNIB's website is specially designed for people with sight loss and provides a wide range of useful information and resources, including an online community and online shop. Action for Blind People Action for Blind People is another national charity that provides blind and partially sighted people with practical help and support. For example, the charity can provide you with support and information about the day-to-day practicalities of living with a visual impairment, such as adjusting your home to make it easier to get around. Other national charities Other national charities that specialise in vision loss and you may find useful include: The Macular Society \u2013 helpline: 0300 3030 111 International Glaucoma Association \u2013 helpline: 01233 64 8170 RP Fighting Blindness \u2013 helpline: 0845 123 2354 or email: helpline@rpfightblindness.org.uk Diabetes UK \u2013 0345 123 2399 or email: info@diabetes.org.uk Blind Veterans UK \u2013 020 7723 5021 Local organisations There are also many local voluntary organisations around the country that help and support people with vision problems. You can search by postcode on a website called Visionary to find local support organisations near you. Registering as blind or partially sighted If your vision has deteriorated to a certain level, you may choose to register as visually impaired. Depending on the severity of your vision loss you'll either be registered as sight impaired (previously \"partially sighted\") or severely sight impaired (previously \"blind\"). Your eye specialist (ophthalmologist) will measure your visual acuity (ability to see detail at a distance) and your field of vision (how much you can see from the side of your eye when looking straight ahead). These measurements will help your ophthalmologist determine whether you\u2019re eligible to be certified as sight impaired or severely sight impaired. If you are, they will complete an official certificate with the results of your eye examination. In England and Wales this certificate is called the Certificate of Vision Impairment (CVI), in Scotland it\u2019s called BP1, and in Northern Ireland it\u2019s called A655. Your ophthalmologist will send a copy of the certificate to you, a copy to your GP and a copy to your local social services department. Upon receiving the certificate, your local social services team will contact you to ask whether you want to be added to its register of visually impaired people. After you're registered, social services will contact you again to arrange for an assessment to be carried out. The aim is to assess your needs and find out what help you require to remain independent, such as help with cleaning and cooking, or help with mobility and transport. Registering as visually impaired isn't compulsory, but it can entitle you to a range of benefits including: Disability Living Allowance (DLA) or Personal Independence Payment (PIP) \u2013 a tax-free benefit to help with any costs relating to your disability or illness a reduction in the TV licence fee a tax allowance reduced fees on public transport parking concessions The RNIB website has more information about registering your sight loss. You can also read more about registering vision impairment on GOV.UK. Changes to your home Most visually impaired people can continue to live at home. However, you'll probably need to make some changes to your home, particularly if you live on your own. Below is a list of some important pieces of equipment you may find useful. Big-button telephone \u2013 both landline and mobile models are available from the RNIB online shop. Computer \u2013 the internet can provide a real sense of connection to friends and family as well as other people with a visual impairment. It's also a practical way of finding out information and obtaining goods and services. Big-button keyboards, screen display software and text readers are available from the RNIB. Community alarm \u2013 this small, wearable device has an alarm button which, if pressed, sends an alarm signal to a response centre, which will alert a nominated friend or carer. Your local authority should be able to provide you with further information. Bright lighting \u2013 bright light bulbs and adjustable lights are essential for your home, particularly in the kitchen and the stairs (areas where you're most likely to have an accident). Fluorescent bulbs are recommended because they produce the most light and tend to be cheaper in the long term than conventional bulbs. The way your house is painted can also make it easier to find your way around. Using a two-tone contrast approach, such as black and white, can make it easier to tell the difference between nearby objects, such as a door and its handle or the stairs and its handrail. Reading and writing There are several options available if you're having problems reading standard text in books, newspapers and magazines. One of the simplest options is to use a magnifying device that can make print appear bigger to help you read. These can be obtained from a number of places including hospital low vision services, optometrists, local voluntary organisations, and the RNIB. The RNIB also has a collection of large print publications you can borrow, as do most libraries. You could also use an e-reader to help you read. E-readers are handheld devices that allow you to download books and subscribe to newspapers and magazines on the internet. You can choose a setting that allows you to display text at a larger size. If you're unable to read at all you could sign up to the: National Talking Newspapers and Magazines scheme, which can provide audio versions of more than 230 titles online or on a CD RNIB Talking Books Service, where you're sent audio books to listen to on your computer or on a device known as a DAISY player You can also install screen-reading software on your computer that will read out emails, documents and text on the internet. A charity called Communication for Blind and Disabled People has released a free screen reader for the PC called Thunder. Similar software is available for Apple devices, although you may have to pay a small fee. There are also voice recognition programmes where you speak into a microphone and the software translates what you say into writing. These programmes can also be used to issue commands, such as closing down the internet and moving from one website to another. Braille Some people with severe sight loss, particularly those who've had the problem from a young age, choose to learn Braille. Braille is a writing system where raised dots are used as a substitute for written letters. As well as Braille versions of books and magazines, you can buy Braille display units, which can be attached to computers that allow you to read the text displayed on a computer screen. Braille computer keyboards are also available. The RNIB website has more information about reading and Braille. Getting around There are several different methods you can use to get around independently if you have a problem with your vision. Long cane You may find a long cane useful when travelling. These type of canes are usually foldable and can help you get around by detecting objects in your path. The cane will also make drivers and other pedestrians aware that you have sight loss. To get the most from a long cane, it's a good idea to attend a training course that will teach you how to use it. The RNIB or Guide Dogs can provide you with further details about training. Guide dogs The charity Guide Dogs has been providing guide dogs for people with vision loss for many years. Guide dogs can help you get around, and provide both a sense of independence and companionship. If you apply for a guide dog, Guide Dogs provide all the essential equipment free of charge and can also offer financial assistance if needed for things like food or vet costs. You don't need to have lost all your sight to benefit from a guide dog and you don't have to be officially registered as blind or partially-sighted to apply for one. The Guide Dogs website has more information about applying for a guide dog. Guide Dogs also offer a number of other services for people with a visual impairment (even if you don't have a guide dog), such as Children and Young People's Services and mobility training. The charity also provides the My Guide service, which aims to reduce the isolation that many people with sight loss experience, helping to rebuild their confidence and regain their independence. Global positioning system (GPS) A global positioning system (GPS) is a navigational aid that uses signals from satellites to tell you where you are and help plan your journeys. GPS devices are available as stand-alone units that can be programmed using a Braille keyboard, which tell you your current location and give you directions to where you want to go. If you have a smartphone, there are a number of GPS apps you can download. The RNIB website has more information about technology and products for people with sight loss, including GPS. Driving If you're diagnosed with a condition that affects your vision, you have a legal obligation to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA). Failure to do so is a crime and can result in a fine of up to £1,000. Visit GOV.UK for more information about driving with a disability or a health condition. If you're registered as having a sight impairment, the DVLA will assume your driving licence is no longer valid and you'll no longer be able to drive. Exceptions are occasionally made for people with mild vision impairment. If you think this applies to you, then your doctor will need to fill in a DVLA medical information questionnaire (PDF, 265kb). You're only legally allowed to drive if you can read a number plate from a distance of 20 metres (65 feet), and an eye test shows your visual acuity is at least 6\/12. You're allowed to wear glasses or contact lenses when reading the plate or letter chart. There are also standards relating to your visual field and driving. If you have a condition that may reduce your visual field, the DVLA may ask you to complete a visual field test to demonstrate you're safe to drive. Employment If you're currently employed and have recently been diagnosed with a visual impairment, you should contact the Access to Work scheme. Access to Work is a scheme run by Jobcentre Plus that provides advice and support about what equipment and adjustments may be required to enable you to do your job. They also offer a grant to contribute towards the costs of any equipment or training you may need, such as voice recognition software, a Braille keyboard and display unit and a printer that can convert text into Braille (Braille embossers). Depending on the size of the company you work for, the grant can pay for 80-100% of costs, up to £10,000. If you're currently looking for work, there are three main organisations that can provide extra advice and support: The RNIB, which has a useful section on its website about looking for work Jobcentre Plus  Action for Blind People  You don't have to disclose that you have a visual impairment when applying for a job, but it's usually recommended that you do. If you feel you've been turned down for a job because of your disability, and you were capable of doing the job, you can make a complaint under the Equality Act 2010. Some people with a visual impairment decide to become self-employed, often because it allows them the flexibility to work at home for hours they choose. Action for Blind People has self-employment advisers who can provide information and training on issues such as drawing up a business plan, obtaining funding and book-keeping. The RNIB website has more information and advice about work and employment. You can also read more about employment on the Action for Blind People website. Regular sight tests If you have vision loss, it's still important to have regular sight tests so your optometrist (eye specialist) can check for further changes in your eyes and give you advice about how to make the best use of your vision. Find an optician near you and read more about NHS eye care services. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 238 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Eye tests for adults Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, learn about the importance of eye tests and how to detect symptoms that could lead to problems with your eyesight. Media last reviewed: 18\/06\/2015 Next review due: 18\/06\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Cataracts Diabetic retinopathy Eye health Find an optician Glaucoma Living with low vision Macular degeneration External links Action for Blind People Eyecare Trust: eye information Guide Dogs: services GOV.UK: driving with a health condition RLSB: early years RNIB: living with sight loss Deafblind UK Look after your eyes Why regular eye tests are important and how a healthy lifestyle can help you maintain good vision Eye health tips for over-60s How to keep your eyes healthy as you get older, with regular eye tests, prescription lenses and self-help measures Living with low vision Nearly 2 million people in the UK are affected by low vision. But with the right help, your eyesight can be maximised Find and choose services for Visual impairment Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vision tests for children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/eye-tests-for-children","content":"Eye tests for children - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Eye tests for children  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Eye tests for children Introduction  Routine eye tests are offered to newborn babies and children to identify any problems early on in their development. Although serious vision problems during childhood are rare, early testing ensures that any problems are picked up and managed as early as possible. This page covers: Why eye tests are important When will my child's eyes be checked? What eye tests may be carried out? Causes of eye problems in babies and children Spotting signs of an eye problem Why eye tests are important Routine eye tests offered soon after birth can detect some eye problems immediately, and tests offered later on can help identify any problems that were missed or develop as your child gets older. Children may not realise they have a vision problem, so without routine tests there is a risk that any problems could go undiagnosed for months or years. It's important for eye problems to be identified as early as possible, because they can have a significant impact on a child's development and education. Eye problems are often much easier to treat if detected while a child's vision is still developing (usually up to about seven or eight years of age). An early diagnosis will help to ensure that you and your child have access to any special support services you may need. When will my child's eyes be checked? Your child's eyes may be checked: within 72 hours of birth \u2013 this is known as the newborn physical examination and it can be used to check for obvious physical problems between six and eight weeks old \u2013 this is a follow-up physical examination to check for any obvious problems that weren't detected soon after birth at around one year old or between two and two-and-a-half years old \u2013 you may be asked whether you have any concerns about your child's eyesight as part of a review of your child's health and development; eye tests can be arranged, if necessary at around four or five years old \u2013 some children will have an eye test when they start school, although this varies, depending on where you live It's also recommended that children have regular eye tests at least once every two years. These tests can be done at a high street opticians and are free for all children under 16 years old (and those under 19 years old in full-time education). Speak to your GP or health visitor if you have any concerns about your child's vision at any stage (see spotting vision problems below). What eye tests may be carried out? A number of tests may be carried out to check for vision or eye problems in babies and children. Some of these are described below. The red reflex test The red reflex test is usually carried out alongside a general examination of your baby's eyes, as part of newborn checks. It involves using an instrument called an ophthalmoscope, which magnifies the eyes and produces a light that allows the eyes to be examined clearly. When light is shone into your baby's eyes, a red reflection should be seen as it's reflected back. If a white reflection is seen, it could be a sign of an eye problem. The pupil reflex test The pupil reflex test involves shining a light into each of your baby\u2019s eyes to check how their pupils (black dots at the centre of the eyes) react to light. Your baby's pupils should automatically shrink in response to the light. If they don't, it could be a sign of a problem with their eyes. Attention to visual objects This is a simple test to check whether a newborn baby pays attention to visual objects. A midwife or doctor will try to catch your baby's attention with an interesting object. They then move it to see if the child's eyes follow. These sorts of tests can also be used to check the eyesight of older babies and young children who are not yet able to speak. If your child can speak, but is not yet able to recognise letters, pictures may be used instead of objects. Snellen and LogMAR charts When your child can recognise or match letters, their vision is tested using charts that have rows of letters and numbers of decreasing sizes. Your child will be asked to read out or match the letters they can see from a specific distance. These charts are called Snellen or LogMAR charts. For younger children, a similar test using pictures or symbols may be carried out instead. Range of movement tests To test the range of movement of each eye, a child's attention will be drawn to an interesting object, which is then moved to eight different positions: up, down, left, right, and halfway between each of these points. This tests how well the eye muscles work. Refraction test A refraction test is carried out by an optometrist at a high street opticians and is used to determine if your child needs glasses and what prescription they need. Before the test, your child may be given special eye drops that widen their pupils, so the back of their eyes can be examined more clearly. Your child will be asked to look at a light, or read letters on a chart if they're old enough, while different lenses are placed in front of their eyes. Colour vision deficiency test Colour vision deficiency tests, also known as colour blindness tests, are usually carried out in older children if a problem is suspected. One of the tests used to check for colour blindness is the Ishihara test. This involves looking at images that are made up of dots in two different colours. If a child's colour vision is normal, they'll be able to recognise a letter or number within the image. A child who can't tell the difference between two colours won't be able to see the number or letter, which means they may have a colour vision problem. Read more about diagnosing colour vision deficiency. Causes of eye problems in babies and children There are a number of different eye problems affecting babies and children that can be detected during eye tests, including: childhood cataracts \u2013 cloudy patches in the lens of the eye that are present from birth lazy eye (amblyopia) \u2013 where the vision in one eye does not develop properly squint (strabismus) \u2013 where the eyes look in different directions short-sightedness (myopia) \u2013 where distant objects appear blurred, while close objects can be seen clearly long-sightedness (hyperopia) \u2013 where you can see distant objects clearly, but nearby objects are out of focus astigmatism \u2013 where the cornea (transparent layer at the front of the eye) is not perfectly curved colour vision deficiency (colour blindness) \u2013 difficulty seeing colours or distinguishing between different colours; this is more common in boys than girls Spotting signs of an eye problem Although your child should have regular eye tests as they grow up, it's still important to look out for signs of any problems and seek advice if you have any concerns. For babies, the checklist in your baby's personal child health record (red book) can be used to help you check if your child's vision is developing normally. In older children, signs of a possible eye problem can include: the eyes not pointing in the same direction complaining of headaches or eye strain problems reading \u2013 for example, they may need to hold books close to their face and they may lose their place regularly problems with hand-eye co-ordination \u2013 for example, they may struggle to play ball games being unusually clumsy regularly rubbing their eyes   Speak to your GP or health visitor if you have any concerns about your child's eyes or vision. They can have an eye test at any age. Page last reviewed: 30\/06\/2015 Next review due: 30\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 10 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Sight tests for children Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out when children need eye tests, what the test involves and why it's important. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Find visual impairment support Childhood cataracts Colour vision deficiency Lazy eye Squint Visual impairment Hearing tests for children External links Blind Children UK RNIB The Eyecare Trust Newborn physical examination All new parents are offered a physical examination for their newborn. Find out what's involved Baby health and development reviews Find out when your baby will have their health and development reviews, and what happens at each one NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Visual impairment","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Visual-impairment","content":"Blindness and vision loss - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blindness and vision loss  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Visual-impairment Clinical trials Blindness and vision loss Information and advice for people with vision loss  In the UK, there are almost 2 million people living with sight loss. Of these, around 360,000 are registered as blind or partially sighted. Being told you have a visual impairment that can't be treated can be difficult to come to terms with. Some people go through a process similar to bereavement, where they experience a range of emotions including shock, anger, and denial, before eventually coming to accept their condition. If you're blind or partially sighted, you may be referred to a specialist low-vision clinic, which is often located within a hospital. Staff at the clinic can help you understand your condition and come to terms with your diagnosis. They can also advise you about practical things, such as lighting and vision aids, and let you know about further sources of help and support. Ask your local hospital if they have an Eye Clinic Liaison Officer (ECLO), whose role involves providing support to people with vision loss in eye clinics. Support groups If you're blind or partially sighted, you may find it helpful to contact a support group for people with vision loss. Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) The Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) is the UK\u2019s leading charity for people with vision loss, and it has a useful page on its website about coming to terms with sight loss. The RNIB's helpline is open Monday to Friday from 8.45am to 5.30pm. The number is 0303 123 9999, with calls costing no more than a standard rate call to an 01 or 02 number. You can also email helpline staff (helpline@rnib.org.uk). The RNIB's website is specially designed for people with sight loss and provides a wide range of useful information and resources, including an online community and online shop. Action for Blind People Action for Blind People is another national charity that provides blind and partially sighted people with practical help and support. For example, the charity can provide you with support and information about the day-to-day practicalities of living with a visual impairment, such as adjusting your home to make it easier to get around. Other national charities Other national charities that specialise in vision loss and you may find useful include: The Macular Society \u2013 helpline: 0300 3030 111 International Glaucoma Association \u2013 helpline: 01233 64 8170 RP Fighting Blindness \u2013 helpline: 0845 123 2354 or email: helpline@rpfightblindness.org.uk Diabetes UK \u2013 0345 123 2399 or email: info@diabetes.org.uk Blind Veterans UK \u2013 020 7723 5021 Local organisations There are also many local voluntary organisations around the country that help and support people with vision problems. You can search by postcode on a website called Visionary to find local support organisations near you. Registering as blind or partially sighted If your vision has deteriorated to a certain level, you may choose to register as visually impaired. Depending on the severity of your vision loss you'll either be registered as sight impaired (previously \"partially sighted\") or severely sight impaired (previously \"blind\"). Your eye specialist (ophthalmologist) will measure your visual acuity (ability to see detail at a distance) and your field of vision (how much you can see from the side of your eye when looking straight ahead). These measurements will help your ophthalmologist determine whether you\u2019re eligible to be certified as sight impaired or severely sight impaired. If you are, they will complete an official certificate with the results of your eye examination. In England and Wales this certificate is called the Certificate of Vision Impairment (CVI), in Scotland it\u2019s called BP1, and in Northern Ireland it\u2019s called A655. Your ophthalmologist will send a copy of the certificate to you, a copy to your GP and a copy to your local social services department. Upon receiving the certificate, your local social services team will contact you to ask whether you want to be added to its register of visually impaired people. After you're registered, social services will contact you again to arrange for an assessment to be carried out. The aim is to assess your needs and find out what help you require to remain independent, such as help with cleaning and cooking, or help with mobility and transport. Registering as visually impaired isn't compulsory, but it can entitle you to a range of benefits including: Disability Living Allowance (DLA) or Personal Independence Payment (PIP) \u2013 a tax-free benefit to help with any costs relating to your disability or illness a reduction in the TV licence fee a tax allowance reduced fees on public transport parking concessions The RNIB website has more information about registering your sight loss. You can also read more about registering vision impairment on GOV.UK. Changes to your home Most visually impaired people can continue to live at home. However, you'll probably need to make some changes to your home, particularly if you live on your own. Below is a list of some important pieces of equipment you may find useful. Big-button telephone \u2013 both landline and mobile models are available from the RNIB online shop. Computer \u2013 the internet can provide a real sense of connection to friends and family as well as other people with a visual impairment. It's also a practical way of finding out information and obtaining goods and services. Big-button keyboards, screen display software and text readers are available from the RNIB. Community alarm \u2013 this small, wearable device has an alarm button which, if pressed, sends an alarm signal to a response centre, which will alert a nominated friend or carer. Your local authority should be able to provide you with further information. Bright lighting \u2013 bright light bulbs and adjustable lights are essential for your home, particularly in the kitchen and the stairs (areas where you're most likely to have an accident). Fluorescent bulbs are recommended because they produce the most light and tend to be cheaper in the long term than conventional bulbs. The way your house is painted can also make it easier to find your way around. Using a two-tone contrast approach, such as black and white, can make it easier to tell the difference between nearby objects, such as a door and its handle or the stairs and its handrail. Reading and writing There are several options available if you're having problems reading standard text in books, newspapers and magazines. One of the simplest options is to use a magnifying device that can make print appear bigger to help you read. These can be obtained from a number of places including hospital low vision services, optometrists, local voluntary organisations, and the RNIB. The RNIB also has a collection of large print publications you can borrow, as do most libraries. You could also use an e-reader to help you read. E-readers are handheld devices that allow you to download books and subscribe to newspapers and magazines on the internet. You can choose a setting that allows you to display text at a larger size. If you're unable to read at all you could sign up to the: National Talking Newspapers and Magazines scheme, which can provide audio versions of more than 230 titles online or on a CD RNIB Talking Books Service, where you're sent audio books to listen to on your computer or on a device known as a DAISY player You can also install screen-reading software on your computer that will read out emails, documents and text on the internet. A charity called Communication for Blind and Disabled People has released a free screen reader for the PC called Thunder. Similar software is available for Apple devices, although you may have to pay a small fee. There are also voice recognition programmes where you speak into a microphone and the software translates what you say into writing. These programmes can also be used to issue commands, such as closing down the internet and moving from one website to another. Braille Some people with severe sight loss, particularly those who've had the problem from a young age, choose to learn Braille. Braille is a writing system where raised dots are used as a substitute for written letters. As well as Braille versions of books and magazines, you can buy Braille display units, which can be attached to computers that allow you to read the text displayed on a computer screen. Braille computer keyboards are also available. The RNIB website has more information about reading and Braille. Getting around There are several different methods you can use to get around independently if you have a problem with your vision. Long cane You may find a long cane useful when travelling. These type of canes are usually foldable and can help you get around by detecting objects in your path. The cane will also make drivers and other pedestrians aware that you have sight loss. To get the most from a long cane, it's a good idea to attend a training course that will teach you how to use it. The RNIB or Guide Dogs can provide you with further details about training. Guide dogs The charity Guide Dogs has been providing guide dogs for people with vision loss for many years. Guide dogs can help you get around, and provide both a sense of independence and companionship. If you apply for a guide dog, Guide Dogs provide all the essential equipment free of charge and can also offer financial assistance if needed for things like food or vet costs. You don't need to have lost all your sight to benefit from a guide dog and you don't have to be officially registered as blind or partially-sighted to apply for one. The Guide Dogs website has more information about applying for a guide dog. Guide Dogs also offer a number of other services for people with a visual impairment (even if you don't have a guide dog), such as Children and Young People's Services and mobility training. The charity also provides the My Guide service, which aims to reduce the isolation that many people with sight loss experience, helping to rebuild their confidence and regain their independence. Global positioning system (GPS) A global positioning system (GPS) is a navigational aid that uses signals from satellites to tell you where you are and help plan your journeys. GPS devices are available as stand-alone units that can be programmed using a Braille keyboard, which tell you your current location and give you directions to where you want to go. If you have a smartphone, there are a number of GPS apps you can download. The RNIB website has more information about technology and products for people with sight loss, including GPS. Driving If you're diagnosed with a condition that affects your vision, you have a legal obligation to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA). Failure to do so is a crime and can result in a fine of up to £1,000. Visit GOV.UK for more information about driving with a disability or a health condition. If you're registered as having a sight impairment, the DVLA will assume your driving licence is no longer valid and you'll no longer be able to drive. Exceptions are occasionally made for people with mild vision impairment. If you think this applies to you, then your doctor will need to fill in a DVLA medical information questionnaire (PDF, 265kb). You're only legally allowed to drive if you can read a number plate from a distance of 20 metres (65 feet), and an eye test shows your visual acuity is at least 6\/12. You're allowed to wear glasses or contact lenses when reading the plate or letter chart. There are also standards relating to your visual field and driving. If you have a condition that may reduce your visual field, the DVLA may ask you to complete a visual field test to demonstrate you're safe to drive. Employment If you're currently employed and have recently been diagnosed with a visual impairment, you should contact the Access to Work scheme. Access to Work is a scheme run by Jobcentre Plus that provides advice and support about what equipment and adjustments may be required to enable you to do your job. They also offer a grant to contribute towards the costs of any equipment or training you may need, such as voice recognition software, a Braille keyboard and display unit and a printer that can convert text into Braille (Braille embossers). Depending on the size of the company you work for, the grant can pay for 80-100% of costs, up to £10,000. If you're currently looking for work, there are three main organisations that can provide extra advice and support: The RNIB, which has a useful section on its website about looking for work Jobcentre Plus  Action for Blind People  You don't have to disclose that you have a visual impairment when applying for a job, but it's usually recommended that you do. If you feel you've been turned down for a job because of your disability, and you were capable of doing the job, you can make a complaint under the Equality Act 2010. Some people with a visual impairment decide to become self-employed, often because it allows them the flexibility to work at home for hours they choose. Action for Blind People has self-employment advisers who can provide information and training on issues such as drawing up a business plan, obtaining funding and book-keeping. The RNIB website has more information and advice about work and employment. You can also read more about employment on the Action for Blind People website. Regular sight tests If you have vision loss, it's still important to have regular sight tests so your optometrist (eye specialist) can check for further changes in your eyes and give you advice about how to make the best use of your vision. Find an optician near you and read more about NHS eye care services. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 238 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Eye tests for adults Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, learn about the importance of eye tests and how to detect symptoms that could lead to problems with your eyesight. Media last reviewed: 18\/06\/2015 Next review due: 18\/06\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Cataracts Diabetic retinopathy Eye health Find an optician Glaucoma Living with low vision Macular degeneration External links Action for Blind People Eyecare Trust: eye information Guide Dogs: services GOV.UK: driving with a health condition RLSB: early years RNIB: living with sight loss Deafblind UK Look after your eyes Why regular eye tests are important and how a healthy lifestyle can help you maintain good vision Eye health tips for over-60s How to keep your eyes healthy as you get older, with regular eye tests, prescription lenses and self-help measures Living with low vision Nearly 2 million people in the UK are affected by low vision. But with the right help, your eyesight can be maximised Find and choose services for Visual impairment Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency","content":"Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Clinical trials Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Community Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Symptoms Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Causes Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Diagnosis Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Treatment Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Complications   Vitamin B12 or B9 (commonly called folate) deficiency anaemia occurs when a lack of vitamin B12 or folate causes the body to produce abnormally large red blood cells that can't function properly. Red blood cells carry oxygen around the body using a substance called haemoglobin. Anaemia is the general term for having either fewer red blood cells than normal or having an abnormally low amount of haemoglobin in each red blood cell. There are several different types of anaemia, and each one has a different cause. For example, iron deficiency anaemia, which occurs when the body doesn't contain enough iron. Symptoms of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency Vitamin B12 and folate perform several important functions in the body, including keeping the nervous system healthy. A deficiency in either of these vitamins can cause a wide range of problems, including: extreme tiredness a lack of energy pins and needles (paraesthesia) a sore and red tongue mouth ulcers muscle weakness disturbed vision psychological problems, which may include depression and confusion  problems with memory, understanding and judgement Some of these problems can also occur if you have a deficiency in vitamin B12 or folate, but don't have anaemia. Read about the symptoms of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. When to see your GP See your GP if you think you may have a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency. These conditions can often be diagnosed based on your symptoms and the results of a blood test. It's important for vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia to be diagnosed and treated as soon as possible because, although many of the symptoms improve with treatment, some problems caused by the condition can be irreversible. Read about diagnosing vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. Causes of a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency There are a number of problems that can lead to a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, including: pernicious anaemia \u2013 where your immune system attacks healthy cells in your stomach, preventing your body from absorbing vitamin B12 from the food you eat; this is the most common cause of vitamin B12 deficiency in the UK a lack of these vitamins in your diet \u2013 this is uncommon, but can occur if you have a vegan diet, follow a fad diet or have a generally poor diet for a long time medication \u2013 certain medications, including anticonvulsants and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), can affect how much of these vitamins your body absorbs  Both vitamin B12 deficiency and folate deficiency are more common in older people, affecting around 1 in 10 people aged 75 or over, and 1 in 20 people aged 65 to 74. Read about the causes of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. Treating vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia Most cases of vitamin B12 and folate deficiency can be easily treated with injections or tablets to replace the missing vitamins. Vitamin B12 supplements are usually given by injection at first. Then, depending on whether your B12 deficiency is related to your diet, you'll either require B12 tablets between meals or regular injections. These treatments may be needed for the rest of your life. Folic acid tablets are used to restore folate levels. These usually need to be taken for four months. In some cases, improving your diet can help treat the condition and prevent it recurring. Vitamin B12 is found in meat, fish, eggs, dairy products, yeast extract (such as Marmite) and specially fortified foods. The best sources of folate include green vegetables such as broccoli, Brussels sprouts and peas. Read about treating vitamin B12 or folate deficiency. Complications of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia Although it's uncommon, vitamin B12 or folate deficiency (with or without anaemia) can lead to complications, particularly if you've been deficient in vitamin B12 or folate for some time. Potential complications can include: problems with the nervous system temporary infertility heart conditions pregnancy complications and birth defects Adults with severe anaemia are also at risk of developing heart failure. Some complications improve with appropriate treatment, but others \u2013 such as problems with the nervous system \u2013 can be permanent.  Read about the complications of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 5198 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 728  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 556  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 265  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3508  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Pregnancy and baby guide Vegetarian and vegan health Blood tests Iron deficiency anaemia Spina bifida External links Pernicious Anaemia Society Lab Tests Online UK: vitamin B12 and folate test Aplastic Anaemia Trust British Nutrition Foundation The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vitamins, minerals and supplements","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vitamins-minerals","content":"Vitamins and minerals - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vitamins and minerals  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vitamins and minerals vitamins-minerals Vitamin A vitamins-minerals B vitamins and folic acid vitamins-minerals Vitamin C vitamins-minerals Vitamin D vitamins-minerals Vitamin E vitamins-minerals Vitamin K vitamins-minerals Calcium vitamins-minerals Iodine vitamins-minerals Iron vitamins-minerals Others Introduction  Vitamins and minerals are essential nutrients your body needs in small amounts to work properly. Most people should get all the nutrients they need by eating a varied and balanced diet. The pages in this section contain advice and information on vitamins, minerals and trace elements essential for health, including: what they do how much you need what happens if you have too much safety advice about supplements  For information about nutrition for children, see vitamins for children. Vitamin and mineral supplements If you choose to take vitamin and mineral supplements, be aware that taking too many or for too long can cause harmful effects. Some people may need to take vitamin and mineral supplements. For information on who could benefit from supplements, see Do I need vitamin supplements? If you're trying to cut down on your salt intake, you might want to avoid vitamin and mineral supplements that come as effervescent or fizzy tablets, as they can contain up to 1g of salt per tablet. Get more tips for a lower-salt diet. What are vitamins? There are two types of vitamins: fat-soluble and water-soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins Fat-soluble vitamins are found mainly in fatty foods and animal products, such as vegetable oils, milk and dairy foods, eggs, liver, oily fish and butter. While your body needs these vitamins every day to work properly, you don't need to eat foods containing them every day. This is because your body stores these vitamins in your liver and fatty tissues for future use. These stores can build up so they are there when you need them. However, if you have much more than you need, fat-soluble vitamins can be harmful. Fat-soluble vitamins are: vitamin A  vitamin D  vitamin E  vitamin K  Water-soluble vitamins Water-soluble vitamins are not stored in the body, so you need to have them more frequently. If you have more than you need, your body gets rid of the extra vitamins when you urinate. As the body does not store water-soluble vitamins, these vitamins are generally not harmful. However, this doesn't mean that all large amounts are necessarily harmless. Water-soluble vitamins are found in a wide range of foods, including fruit, vegetables, potatoes, grains, milk and dairy foods. Unlike fat-soluble vitamins, they can be destroyed by heat or being exposed to the air. They can also be lost in water used for cooking. This means that by cooking foods, especially boiling them, we lose some of these vitamins. The best way to keep as many of the water-soluble vitamins as possible is to steam or grill foods, rather than boil them, or to use the cooking water in soups or stews rather than pouring it away. Water-soluble vitamins are vitamin C, the B vitamins and folic acid. There are also many other types of vitamins and minerals that are an important part of a healthy diet. What are minerals? Minerals are necessary for three main reasons: building strong bones and teeth controlling body fluids inside and outside cells turning the food you eat into energy Minerals are found in foods such as meat, cereals (including cereal products such as bread), fish, milk and dairy foods, vegetables, fruit (especially dried fruit) and nuts. Essential minerals include calcium and iron, although there are also many other types of minerals that are an important part of a healthy diet. What are trace elements? Trace elements are also essential nutrients that your body needs to work properly, but in much smaller amounts than vitamins and minerals. Trace elements are found in small amounts in a variety of foods such as meat, fish, cereals, milk and dairy foods, vegetables and nuts. Examples of trace elements are iodine and fluoride. Page last reviewed: 18\/02\/2015 Next review due: 18\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1127 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 321  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 133  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 478  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Do I need vitamin supplements? Food and diet Special report: supplements Vitamins for children Vitamins and nutrition in pregnancy External links Food Standards Agency (FSA) Healthy Start Community content from HealthUnlocked Does your child need vitamin drops? Find out why vitamins are so important to your child's health, and which vitamin supplements are recommended Vitamins and special diets during pregnancy The essential vitamins and minerals, and how to get enough of them in pregnancy Healthy eating Information on how to achieve a balanced diet, tips to help you get your 5 A DAY, plus advice for vegetarians Vitamin D Read more about vitamin D, which helps regulate calcium and phosphate levels in the body and keeps bones and teeth healthy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vitiligo","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Vitiligo","content":"Vitiligo - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vitiligo  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vitiligo Real stories Vitiligo Clinical trials Vitiligo Community Vitiligo Vitiligo Symptoms Vitiligo Causes Vitiligo Diagnosis Vitiligo Treatment Introduction  Vitiligo is a long-term condition that causes pale, white patches to develop on the skin due to the lack of a chemical called melanin. Vitiligo can affect any area of your skin, but most commonly occurs on skin exposed to the sun, such as your face, neck and hands. The condition varies from person to person. Some people only get a few small, white patches, but others get bigger white patches that join up across large areas of their skin. There is no way of predicting how much skin will be affected. The white patches are usually permanent. Read more about the symptoms of vitiligo. Why does vitiligo happen? Vitiligo occurs due to a lack of melanin in the affected areas of skin. Melanin, which is produced by specialised skin cells called melanocytes, gives your skin its colour and protects it from the sun. It's not clear exactly what causes this lack of melanin, but it has been linked to problems with the immune system (autoimmune conditions) and nerve endings in the skin. Certain things can increase your chances of developing vitiligo, such as a family history of the condition or having another autoimmune problem, like an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism). Vitiligo is not caused by an infection and you cannot catch it from contact with someone who has it. Read more about the causes of vitiligo. Who is affected? In the UK, about 1 in 100 people develop vitiligo. In around half of people affected it starts before the age of 20, although it can occur at any age. Men and women are equally affected, as are people of different ethnicities. Diagnosis Vitiligo can usually be identified by a GP after a physical examination. You may also be asked questions about your family's medical history and if the problem is affecting your confidence. In some cases, an ultraviolet lamp may be shone on your skin to examine it in more detail and rule out other skin conditions. You may also be checked for symptoms of other autoimmune conditions, such as diabetes. Blood tests are sometimes taken to check how well your thyroid gland is functioning. Read more about diagnosing vitiligo. How is vitiligo treated? The white patches caused by vitiligo are usually permanent, although there are treatment options to improve the appearance of your skin. If the patches are relatively small, skin camouflage cream may be used to cover them up. In general, combination treatments, such as phototherapy (treatment with light) and medication, give the best results. In some cases, treatment may restore pigment (colour) to your patches, but the effect doesn't usually last. Treatment cannot stop the condition from spreading. Read more about treating vitiligo. Complications Vitiligo can sometimes cause other problems. Due to a lack of melanin, your skin will be more vulnerable to the effects of the sun. If it is not protected with a strong sunscreen, sunburn is likely. Vitiligo may also lead to a lack of pigmentation in your eyes and a partial loss of hearing (hypoacusis). Problems with confidence and self-esteem are common in people with vitiligo, particularly if the condition affects areas of frequently exposed skin. Support groups can often help by putting you in contact with other people who have vitiligo. Your GP may suggest a group in your area, and charities such as The Vitiligo Society may be able to help. Vitiligo: Robert's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Robert has vitiligo, which causes loss of skin colour. Find out how it affected his confidence, and learn about his treatment. Media last reviewed: 29\/05\/2015 Next review due: 29\/05\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/10\/2014 Next review due: 03\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 131 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Skin Overactive thyroid Sunburn Topical corticosteroids How to be sun smart video External links Changing Faces: skin camouflage service British Skin Foundation: vitiligo The Vitiligo Society Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer Find and choose services for Vitiligo Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vomiting blood","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vomiting-blood","content":"Vomiting blood - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vomiting blood (haematemesis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vomiting blood Introduction  Vomiting blood is a medical emergency and requires immediate medical assistance. Go to your GP surgery or your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department. It can be a sign of a serious medical problem and needs to be investigated straight away. If you vomit blood it means there's bleeding somewhere in your gullet, stomach or the first part of your small intestine (duodenum). Haematemesis is the medical name for blood in the vomit. The amount and colour of blood can vary. For example: you may have vomited large amounts of bright red blood there may be streaks of blood in your vomit, mixed up with food there may be what look like coffee grounds in your vomit, which means the blood has been in your stomach for a few hours Keep a small sample of the vomit to show your GP or the doctor treating you. It will give them much better idea of what's wrong. Unless you're perfectly well and the cause is obvious to your GP or doctor (for example, swallowing blood from a nosebleed), you should be admitted to hospital straight away for tests. These will include blood tests and an endoscopy. This is where a thin, flexible tube with a light and camera at one end (an endoscope) is used to examine the inside of your digestive tract. It's important to confirm that the blood you've vomited has come from your stomach or gullet, and that you haven't coughed it up from your airways or lungs, which would indicate a completely different problem. Read about coughing up blood. Below is a summary of the most likely causes of blood in the vomit. It's a rough guide that should give you a better idea of the problem. However, don't use it to diagnose yourself \u2013 always leave that to your GP or doctor. Common causes of vomiting blood The most common causes of vomiting blood are discussed below. Stomach ulcer or severe gastritis A stomach ulcer or severe gastritis (stomach lining inflammation) are the most likely cause of vomiting blood if you also have a burning or gnawing pain in your tummy. Bleeding occurs when the ulcer or inflammation damages an underlying artery. Oesophageal varices Oesophageal varices are enlarged veins in the walls of the lower part of the oesophagus (gullet) that bleed but don't usually cause any pain. They're often caused by alcoholic liver disease. If your GP or doctor suspects that oesophageal varices are the cause of blood in your vomit, you'll need to be admitted to hospital immediately. Severe gastro-oesophageal reflux disease Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) is where acid leaks out of the stomach and up into the oesophagus. If you have severe GORD it can irritate the lining of your oesophagus and cause bleeding. Tear in the oesophagus Prolonged retching can tear the lining of your oesophagus, which can also result in bleeding. Swallowed blood It's possible to swallow blood in certain circumstances \u2013 for example, after a severe nosebleed. The above conditions may also cause you to have blood in your stools (causing black, tarry poo). Less common causes of vomiting blood Less commonly, blood in your vomit may be caused by: swallowing poisons \u2013 such as corrosive acid or arsenic (read more about poisoning) a blood condition \u2013 such as thrombocytopenia (a reduced number of platelets in the blood), leukaemia, haemophilia or anaemia cancer of the oesophagus or stomach cancer \u2013 cancer may be suspected if you're over 55 and you've also lost a lot of weight (it's otherwise rare)  Haematemesis is the medical name for blood in the vomit  About A&E departments Find out when it is appropriate to go to A&E and what other services offer urgent care Page last reviewed: 06\/10\/2014 Next review due: 06\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 187 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coughing up blood Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease Oesophageal cancer Stomach cancer Stomach ulcer External links Lab Tests Online UK: H. pylori test Nosebleeds Nosebleeds are common and usually harmless. Find out how to treat them at home and when to seek medical advice NHS ambulance services Read about different ambulance services in England and find out when to call 999 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vomiting in adults","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vomiting-adults","content":"Nausea and vomiting in adults - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nausea and vomiting in adults  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vomiting in adults Introduction  Nausea and vomiting in adults isn't usually a sign of anything serious and tends to only last one or two days. Vomiting is the body\u2019s way of ridding itself of harmful substances from the stomach, or it may be a reaction to something that has irritated the gut. One of the most common causes of vomiting in adults is gastroenteritis. This is an infection of the gut usually caused by bacteria or a virus, which will normally improve within a few days. However, vomiting can occasionally be a sign of something more serious, such as appendicitis, so if you are feeling very unwell or are worried about your vomiting, trust your instincts and call your GP. There is a separate topic on vomiting in children and babies. When to contact your GP Contact your GP if: you've been vomiting repeatedly for more than a day or two you're unable to keep down any fluids because you are vomiting repeatedly your vomit is green (this could mean you are bringing up a fluid called bile, which suggests you may have a blockage in your bowel \u2013 see below) you have signs of severe dehydration, such as confusion, a rapid heartbeat, sunken eyes and passing little or no urine you've lost a lot of weight since you became ill you experience episodes of vomiting frequently Your GP may want to investigate the cause of your vomiting or prescribe treatment. You should also see your GP if you have diabetes and have been vomiting persistently, particularly if you need to take insulin. This is because prolonged vomiting can affect your blood sugar level. When to seek emergency medical help Occasionally, vomiting can be a sign of a more serious problem. You should call 999 for an ambulance, or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if you also have: sudden, severe abdominal (tummy) pain severe chest pain blood in your vomit or what looks like coffee granules a stiff neck and high temperature (fever) a sudden, severe headache that's unlike any headache you've had before You should also seek emergency medical help if you think you have swallowed something poisonous. Common causes of vomiting in adults Gastroenteritis If you have diarrhoea as well as vomiting, it's likely you have gastroenteritis. This is one of the most common causes of vomiting in adults. It's often the result of a virus picked up from someone who's ill, such as the norovirus, or food poisoning caused by bacteria found in contaminated food. Your immune system will usually fight off the infection after a few days and the self-care measures described above can help in the meantime. Read more about treating gastroenteritis. Pregnancy Pregnant women typically experience repeated episodes of nausea and vomiting, particularly during the early stages of pregnancy. This is often called \"morning sickness\", although it can occur throughout the day. In most cases, morning sickness will develop at some point during the first three months of pregnancy and will pass by about weeks 16-20. Read more about morning sickness, including things you can do to help reduce your symptoms. Migraines If you have recurrent episodes of vomiting along with intense, throbbing headaches that last for a few hours to days at a time, you may be experiencing migraines. Conventional painkillers, such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, can sometimes help control the pain and your GP can prescribe anti-sickness medicine to help prevent vomiting. Read more about treating migraines. Labyrinthitis If your vomiting is accompanied by dizziness and a feeling of spinning (vertigo), it may be caused by an inner ear infection called labyrinthitis. Labyrinthitis will usually improve over a few days, and your GP can prescribe medication to reduce your symptoms if necessary. Motion sickness Nausea and vomiting associated with travelling could be a sign of motion sickness. These symptoms can sometimes be improved using techniques such as fixing your eyes on the horizon or distracting yourself by listening to music, although medication to prevent and treat motion sickness is also available.  Appendicitis As well as vomiting, appendicitis can cause severe pain in your abdomen (tummy). You should call 999 for an ambulance if you experience pain that suddenly becomes worse and spreads across your abdomen. These are signs that your appendix may have burst. If you have appendicitis, you will often need surgery to remove your appendix. Read more about treating appendicitis. Other causes of vomiting in adults Vomiting in adults can also be caused by a number of other things, including: certain medicines, such as antibiotics and opioid painkillers drinking too much alcohol kidney infections and kidney stones a blockage in your bowel, which may be caused by a hernia or gallstones chemotherapy and radiotherapy acute cholecystitis (inflammation of the gallbladder) Clink on the links above for more information about these conditions and treatments. Looking after yourself at home In most cases, you won't need any specific treatment and can take care of yourself at home until you feel better. The most important thing you can do is to keep taking small sips of water frequently so you don't become dehydrated. A sweet drink such as fruit juice can be useful for replacing lost sugar, although you should avoid sweet drinks if they make you feel sick. Salty snacks, such as crisps, can help replace lost salt. You may also find ginger helps to relieve your nausea and vomiting. This is available as supplements, or can be found in ginger biscuits and ginger tea. Check with your pharmacist or GP before using ginger supplements. Page last reviewed: 17\/12\/2014 Next review due: 17\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 595 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 232  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Morning sickness Gastroenteritis Dehydration Ten ways to prevent food poisoning How to prevent food poisoning, including tips on hand washing, food storage and thorough cooking Morning sickness How to deal with nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, and when to seek medical help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vomiting in children and babies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vomiting-children-babies","content":"Vomiting in children and babies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vomiting in children and babies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vomiting in children and babies Introduction  It's normal for babies and children to vomit occasionally. In most cases, it will last no longer than one to two days and isn't a sign of anything serious. The most common cause of vomiting in children and babies is gastroenteritis. This is an infection of the gut usually caused by a virus or bacteria, which also causes diarrhoea. The symptoms can be unpleasant but your child will usually start to feel better after a few days. However, persistent vomiting can sometimes cause your child to become severely dehydrated and occasionally it can be a sign of something more serious, such as meningitis. This page outlines what to do if your child keeps vomiting and describes some of the common causes of vomiting in children and babies. If your child has a high temperature, you can also read a separate page about fever in children. What to do If your child vomits, you should keep a close eye on them. Trust your instincts and contact your GP immediately if you're worried. If the cause is just a tummy bug, your child should still be feeling well enough to eat, play and be their usual self. In this case, keep feeding them as normal and offer them regular drinks (see below). But if they don't seem themself \u2013 for example, if they're floppy, irritable or less responsive \u2013 they may be seriously ill, so you should get medical help immediately. When to get medical advice You should contact your GP if: your child is repeatedly vomiting and is unable to hold down fluids you think they're dehydrated \u2013 symptoms of dehydration can include a dry mouth, crying without producing tears, urinating less or not wetting many nappies, and drowsiness their vomit is green or contains blood they have been vomiting for more than a day or two Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if your child is vomiting and develops sudden and severe tummy pain, or they're floppy, irritable or less responsive Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest A&E department immediately if they're vomiting and have a headache, stiff neck and a rash. Looking after your child at home In most cases, you can treat your child safely at home. The most important thing you can do is make sure they keep drinking fluids to prevent dehydration. If your baby is vomiting, carry on breastfeeding or giving them milk feeds. If they seem dehydrated, they will need extra fluids. Ask your GP or pharmacist whether you should give your baby oral rehydration solution. Oral rehydration solution is a special powder that you make into a drink. It contains sugar and salts to help replace the water and salts lost through vomiting and diarrhoea. Children who are vomiting should keep taking small sips of clear fluid, such as water or clear broth. Fruit juice and fizzy drinks should be avoided until they're feeling better. If they're not dehydrated and haven't lost their appetite, it's fine for your child to eat solid foods as normal. Again, speak to your GP or pharmacist if you're concerned about dehydration. They may recommend an oral rehydration solution for your child. Contact your GP or practice nurse if your child is unable to hold down oral rehydration solution. If your child has diarrhoea and is vomiting, they shouldn't go to school or any other childcare facility until 48 hours after the last episode of diarrhoea or vomiting. Read more about treating gastroenteritis in children. Causes of vomiting in children There are a number of possible causes of vomiting in children, which are described below. Gastroenteritis Gastroenteritis is an infection of the gut. It's a common cause of vomiting in children and usually lasts a few days. Food allergy Food allergies can cause vomiting in children, as well as other symptoms, such as a raised, red, itchy skin rash (urticaria) and swelling of the face, around the eyes, lips, tongue or the roof of the mouth. Watch out for foods that may bring on vomiting and see your GP for a diagnosis if you think your child may have a food allergy. Other infections Vomiting can sometimes be a sign of an infection other than gastroenteritis, such as urinary tract infections (UTIs), middle ear infections, pneumonia or meningitis. Contact your child's GP if they're vomiting and experiencing additional symptoms of an infection, such as a high temperature (fever) and irritability. Appendicitis Appendicitis is a painful swelling of the appendix, a finger-like pouch connected to the large intestine. It causes severe tummy pain that gets worse over time. If your child has tummy pain that's gradually getting worse, contact your GP, local out-of-hours service or NHS 111 immediately. You should call 999 for an ambulance if they have pain that gets worse quickly and spreads across their tummy. In most cases of appendicitis, the appendix will need to be surgically removed as soon as possible. Poison Accidentally swallowing something poisonous can cause your child to vomit. If you think this is the case, contact your GP immediately or take your child to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department. Causes of vomiting in babies These include: gastroenteritis  a food allergy or milk intolerance gastro-oesophageal reflux \u2013 where stomach contents escape back up the gullet  too big a hole in the bottle teat, which causes your baby to swallow too much milk \u2013 read more bottle feeding advice accidentally swallowing something poisonous congenital pyloric stenosis \u2013 a condition present at birth where the passage from the stomach to the bowel has narrowed, so food is unable to pass through easily; this causes projectile vomiting a strangulated hernia \u2013 your baby will vomit frequently and cry as if they are in a lot of pain; this should be treated as a medical emergency intussusception (where the bowel telescopes in on itself) \u2013 as well as vomiting, your baby may look pale, floppy and have symptoms of dehydration Page last reviewed: 17\/04\/2015 Next review due: 17\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 475 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 216  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 133  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Fever and vomiting Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out if your child's fever and vomiting is a sign of a serious illness, or the result of a common virus with no cause for alarm. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Diarrhoea and vomiting in children Gastroenteritis External links NICE: diarrhoea and vomiting in children under 5 Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor Does your child have a serious illness? Learn the warning signs that your baby or toddler may be seriously ill Learn to recognise meningitis This symptom alert shows the signs and includes a printable checklist NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Von Willebrand disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/von-willebrand-disease","content":"Von Willebrand disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Von Willebrand disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview von-willebrand-disease Clinical trials Von Willebrand disease Introduction  Von Willebrand disease is the most common inherited bleeding disorder. People with Von Willebrand disease (VWD) either have a deficiency of a blood protein called Von Willebrand factor, or this protein doesn't work properly. This means that their blood cannot clot properly and they are prone to prolonged or excessive bleeding. Von Willebrand factor acts like a glue which allows platelets (a type of blood cell) to stick together and to plug up damaged blood vessels. It also carries and protects another clotting factor called FVIII (factor 8). Signs and symptoms VWD can cause problems at any time from birth, but for many people the symptoms are so mild that they may never know they have it. It's estimated that around 1% of the UK population have reduced levels of Von Willebrand factor, but only a small minority have symptoms that might require medical attention. Symptoms of VWD can include: bruising easily bleeding from the gums, nose and lining of the gut prolonged bleeding from cuts excessive bleeding after tooth extraction or surgery in women, heavy periods With treatment, even people with more severe symptoms can go on to lead normal and active lives. What causes VWD? VWD is usually caused by a fault in the gene responsible for the production of Von Willebrand factor. This genetic fault can be passed on to a child by one or both of their parents. There are four different types of VWD. The condition is classified according to the amount and function of the Von Willebrand factor in the blood. The main types are: Type 1 \u2013 The mildest and most common type. People with type 1 VWD have a reduced level of Von Willebrand factor in their blood. Symptoms might be so mild they never know they have VWD. They don't usually bleed spontaneously, but can bleed significantly if they have surgery, injure themselves or have a tooth removed. Type 2 \u2013 In this type, which can itself be divided into four further subtypes, the Von Willebrand factor doesn't work properly. The symptoms of type 2 VWD are often more severe than type 1, but milder than type 3. Type 3 \u2013 People with this rare type have very low levels of Von Willebrand factor in their blood, or none at all. This causes problems similar to haemophilia. Bleeding from the mouth, nose and bowel from an early age is typical, and joint and muscle bleeds can occur after injury. Pseudo, or platelet type \u2013 this is similar to type 2, but instead of the abnormality occurring in the Von Willebrand factor, it occurs in the platelets. Types 1, 2 and pseudo-VWD are often passed on through \"autosomal dominant inheritance\". This means that only one parent has to pass a copy of the faulty gene to their child for them to develop the condition. Type 3 VWD is passed on through \"autosomal recessive inheritance\". This means the child needs to inherit a copy of the faulty gene from both parents. In such cases, the parents may have no symptoms themselves because they may have only inherited a copy of the faulty gene from one of their own parents, rather than both. Read more about genetic inheritance. Diagnosing VWD The symptoms of VWD can be mild and this can mean it is sometimes difficult to diagnose. If a doctor suspects you may have VWD, you should be referred to a haematologist (a specialist in diagnosing and treating blood disorders) for tests and any necessary treatment. A blood test can usually be carried out to diagnose the condition, although this may occasionally have to be repeated because levels of Von Willebrand factor can vary over time. You will also be asked about your family history to check if any other members of the family have a bleeding disorder. Managing VWD Mild VWD might not need any treatment, and you may be able to manage the condition by taking special precautions and making a few lifestyle changes. Otherwise, three main treatments are available to either prevent or treat bleeding: desmopressin \u2013 available as a nasal spray or injection tranexamic acid \u2013 available as tablets, a mouthwash or an injection Von Willebrand factor concentrate \u2013 this is purified from human plasma (from donated blood) and is given directly into a vein Your doctor will explain which medication is suitable for you and when you should take it. Your doctor will often recommend a \"test dose\" of desmopressin to check that it works well. Common side effects include facial flushing, palpitations, changes in blood pressure, and sometimes a mild headache. It can also cause fluid retention for up to 24 hours after it is taken, so your doctor will ask you to restrict the amount of fluid you drink after treatment. Some advice on the use of these medications is given below, along with general lifestyle changes you can make. General advice Most people with VWD have the mildest type, type 1, and may not even realise they have it. They can live normal and active lives and take part in most sports and activities. In more severe cases, contact sports may need to be avoided. Protective equipment should also be worn for certain activities where there is a risk of bleeding or bruising. People with VWD should usually avoid taking aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen, as these can further reduce the blood's ability to clot. If someone with VWD has an accident or is scheduled for surgery, it is important that the doctor or surgeon is aware the person has the condition. Due to the risk of excessive bleeding, boys at risk of VWD should not be circumcised without first speaking to a doctor. Managing heavy periods Girls and women with VWD who have heavy periods might want to carry extra pads or even a change of clothes in case of excessive bleeding. They should get advice from their GP or gynaecologist about options to control their bleeding, these include: the oral contraceptive pill an intrauterine device (IUD) tranexamic acid tablets a desmopressin nasal spray in severe cases, Von Willebrand factor concentrate Read more about treating heavy periods. Managing nosebleeds and other injuries If bleeding does occur, applying pressure to the area may be all that's needed. For example, someone who gets a nosebleed should put pressure on the bridge of the nose to help stop the bleeding.  Taking medication continuously to prevent bleeding and bruising is not usually necessary, although your doctor may prescribe desmopressin or tranexamic acid for you to take in the event of an injury or bleed. Injections of Von Willebrand factor concentrate may be needed to treat injuries in people with type 3 or type 2 VWD, or particularly severe injuries in people with type 1 VWD. Preventing bleeding before dental procedures or surgery People with type 1 VWD can usually be treated with desmopressin before dental procedures or surgery. Desmopressin temporarily boosts levels of Von Willebrand factor long enough to prevent bleeding during the procedure. Tranexamic acid is also often given in addition to desmopressin. This may not necessarily be helpful in treating people with some forms of type 2 VWD, and is not at all effective in type 3 VWD (as there are no levels of Von Willebrand factor to boost). In these cases, injections of Von Willebrand factor concentrate may be needed instead. Patients with type 1 also might need Von Willebrand factor concentrate before major surgery, although desmopressin and tranexamic acid usually offer enough protection against bleeding. Advice for pregnant women Levels of Von Willebrand factor often increase throughout pregnancy \u2013 but despite this, some pregnant women with VWD are at increased risk of bleeding complications during labour and after delivery. As long as the doctors and midwives are aware of your condition, you can be monitored carefully and given treatment, if required, to prevent bleeding during and after delivery. Information about you If you have VWD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. People with VWD can be prone to prolonged nosebleeds  Acquired Von Willebrand disease Although it is uncommon, some cases of Von Willebrand disease are not caused by an inherited genetic fault and instead occur later in life. This is known as acquired Von Willebrand disease (AVWD). AVWD usually occurs when an underlying condition affects how Von Willebrand factor works or reduces the amount of it in the body. A number of different conditions are associated with AVWD, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), thickening of the aortic valve (aortic stenosis) and some types of cancer such as multiple myeloma. Treating the underlying cause \u2013 if possible \u2013 can help manage AVWD, although sometimes the same treatments used for inherited VWD may be needed, such as desmopressin and Von Willebrand factor replacement. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/08\/2014 Next review due: 28\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 82 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Nosebleeds Heavy periods Blood tests Genetics First aid Plasma products Haemophilia External links Haemophilia Society Heavy periods self-assessment This assessment will help you to gauge how heavy your periods are and will explain more about treatment options Von Willebrand disease medicines information Read more about the medicines used to treat VWD NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vulval cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-vulva","content":"Vulval cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vulval cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-vulva Clinical trials Vulval cancer Cancer-of-the-vulva Causes Cancer-of-the-vulva Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-vulva Treatment Introduction  Cancer of the vulva is a rare type of cancer that affects women. Around 1,200 new cases are diagnosed each year in the UK. The vulva is a woman's external genitals. It includes the lips surrounding the vagina (labia minora and labia majora), the clitoris (sexual organ that helps women reach sexual climax), and the Bartholin's glands (two small glands each side of the vagina). Most of those affected by vulval cancer are older women over the age of 65. The condition is rare in women under 50 who have not yet gone through the menopause. Symptoms of vulval cancer Symptoms of vulval cancer can include: a persistent itch in the vulva pain, soreness or tenderness in the vulva raised and thickened patches of skin that can be red, white or dark a lump or wart-like growth on the vulva bleeding from the vulva or blood-stained vaginal discharge between periods an open sore in the vulva a burning pain when passing urine a mole on the vulva that changes shape or colour See your GP if you notice any changes in the usual appearance of your vulva. While it's highly unlikely to be the result of cancer, these changes should be investigated. Read more about diagnosing vulval cancer. What causes vulval cancer? The exact cause of vulval cancer is unclear, but your risk of developing the condition is increased by the following factors: increasing age vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) \u2013 where the cells in the vulva are abnormal and at risk of turning cancerous persistent infection with certain versions of the human papilloma virus (HPV) skin conditions affecting the vulva, such as lichen sclerosus smoking You may be able to reduce your risk of vulval cancer by stopping smoking and taking steps to reduce the chances of picking up an HPV infection. Read more about the causes of vulval cancer. How vulval cancer is treated The main treatment for vulval cancer is surgery to remove the cancerous tissue from the vulva and any lymph nodes containing cancerous cells. Some people may also have radiotherapy (where radiation is used to destroy cancer cells) or chemotherapy (where medication is used to kill cancer cells), or both. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy may be used without surgery if you're not well enough to have an operation, or if the cancer has spread and it isn't possible to remove it all. Read more about treating vulval cancer. Outlook The outlook for vulval cancer depends on things such as how far the cancer has spread, your age, and your general health. Generally, the earlier the cancer is detected and the younger you are, the better the chances of treatment being successful. Overall, around 6 in every 10 women diagnosed with vulval cancer will survive at least five years. However, even after successful treatment, the cancer comes back in up to one in every three cases. You'll need regular follow-up appointments so your doctor can check if this is happening. Can vulval cancer be prevented? It's not thought to be possible to prevent vulval cancer completely, but you may be able to reduce your risk by: practising safer sex \u2013 using a condom during sex can offer some protection against HPV attending cervical screening appointments \u2013 cervical screening can detect HPV and pre-cancerous conditions such as VIN stopping smoking The HPV vaccination may also reduce your chances of developing vulval cancer. This is now offered to all girls who are 12 to 13 years old as part of their routine childhood immunisation programme. Page last reviewed: 22\/04\/2015 Next review due: 22\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 139 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Find cancer information and support Living with cancer Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: vulval cancer Macmillan: understanding vulval cancer The Eve Appeal: vulval cancer Is my vagina normal? No two vaginas are the same: find out what's normal and healthy when it comes to size, shape and colour Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vulvar vestibulitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vulvodynia","content":"Vulvodynia (vulval pain) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vulvodynia (vulval pain)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview vulvodynia Clinical trials Vulvodynia   Vulvodynia is persistent, unexplained pain in the vulva (the skin surrounding the entrance to the vagina). It can affect women of all ages, and often occurs in women who are otherwise healthy. Vulvodynia can be a long-term (chronic) problem that's very distressing to live with, but much can be done to help relieve the pain. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Treatments Possible causes Other causes of vulval pain Support and more information Symptoms of vulvodynia The main symptom of vulvodynia is persistent pain in and around the vulva. The vulva usually looks normal. The pain may be: a burning, stinging or sore sensation triggered by touch, such as during sex or when inserting a tampon constantly in the background and can be worse when sitting limited to part of the vulva, such as the opening of the vagina more widespread \u2013 sometimes it can spread to the buttocks and inner thighs Some women also have problems such as vaginismus (where the muscles around the vagina tighten involuntarily), interstitial cystitis (a painful bladder condition), painful periods and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Having chronic pain can also affect relationships, reduce sex drive, and cause low mood and depression. Pain in the genital area is often difficult to talk about with friends and it's not uncommon to feel isolated. When to get medical advice See your GP or visit your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic if you have persistent vulval pain. Vulvodynia is unlikely to get better on its own and some of the treatments are only available on prescription. There are also a number of other causes of vulval pain that need to be ruled out. Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and may touch your vulva lightly with the tip of a cotton bud to see if this causes pain. A swab may also be taken to check for conditions such as infections. Many people with vulval pain can have the condition for many years before a diagnosis is made and proper management started. The British Society for the Study of Vulval Disease has a map of vulval clinics and services in the UK that you can use to search for services near you. You can't self-refer to these services, but you could discuss a referral with your GP. Treatments for vulvodynia A combination of some of the following treatments can often help relieve symptoms of vulvodynia and reduce its impact on your life: Self-care Gels and lubricants Medication Physiotherapy Therapy and counselling Surgery Self-care The following lifestyle tips may help reduce symptoms of vulvodynia: Wear 100% cotton underwear and loose-fitting skirts or trousers. Avoid scented hygiene products such as feminine wipes, bubble bath and soap \u2013 an emollient is a good substitute for soap. Apply cool gel packs to your vulva to soothe the pain. Use petroleum jelly before swimming to provide protection from chlorine. Try not to avoid sex or touching your vulva completely, as this may make your vulva more sensitive \u2013 if sex is painful, try to find a position that's more comfortable, or if penetration is painful do other sexually intimate activities together until you've sought advice. Try to reduce stress, as it can increase the pain of vulvodynia \u2013 read some relaxation tips to relieve stress. For pain when sitting, using a doughnut-shaped cushion can help. Over-the-counter gels and lubricants Applying the anaesthetic gel lidocaine to your vulva about 10 minutes before sex may make it more comfortable. To stop the gel getting on your partner, either wipe it off just before having sex or ask your partner to wear a condom (if using condoms, use latex-free ones as latex condoms can be damaged by lidocaine). If your pain is more constant, applying lidocaine regularly throughout the day may help. Lidocaine can also be used overnight. A tip is to put some on a cotton make-up removal pad and put it onto the sore area so it's held in place by your underwear. It's very common to have some burning when the lidocaine is initially applied which can last several minutes before going numb. Try to give the lidocaine time it to work, but if the burning continues for 10 minutes, wash it off thoroughly. Tubes of 5% lidocaine gel, cream or ointment can be bought over the counter from a pharmacy, although it's a good idea to get a doctor's advice before trying it. Vaginal lubricants and aqueous cream (also available over the counter) may soothe the area and help moisturise the vulva if it's dry. Speak to your pharmacist about these treatments. Prescription medication Conventional painkillers such as paracetamol won't usually relieve the pain of vulvodynia. But several medications available on prescription can help, including: antidepressants called amitriptyline and nortriptyline \u2013 possible side effects include drowsiness, weight gain and dry mouth anti-epilepsy medicines called gabapentin and pregabalin \u2013 possible side effects include dizziness, drowsiness and weight gain Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose and gradually increase it until your pain subsides. You may need to take the medication for several months. If you have pain in a specific area of your vulva, injections of local anaesthetic and steroid medication into a nearby nerve may provide temporary pain relief. Physiotherapy A physiotherapist can teach you some pelvic floor exercises (such as squeezing and releasing your pelvic floor muscles) to help relax the muscles around your vagina. Another technique to relax the muscles in the vagina and desensitise it involves using a set of vaginal trainers. These are smooth cones of gradually increasing size and length which can be inserted into your vagina in the privacy of your own home. Some physiotherapists may also suggest trying TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) to reduce your pain. This is where a machine is used to deliver a mild electrical current to the painful area. Therapy and counselling Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a type of therapy that aims to help you manage your problems by changing how you think and act. It can often help women cope with the impact that vulvodynia has on their life. CBT focuses on the problems and difficulties you have now, and looks for practical ways you can improve your state of mind on a daily basis. Psychosexual counselling is helpful when pain is affecting intimacy between you and your partner. This is a type of therapy that aims to address problems such as fear and anxiety about sex, and to restore a physical relationship with your partner. Surgery Only in very rare cases, surgery to remove part of the vulva may be an option. Pain however can recur and it's usually not recommended. Possible causes of vulvodynia The exact cause of vulvodynia is unknown. It's thought it may be the result of a problem with the nerves supplying the vulva, although it's not clear what causes this. Possible triggers that have been suggested include damage due to previous surgery or childbirth, trapped nerves or a history of severe vaginal thrush. Vulvodynia is not contagious. It has nothing to do with personal hygiene and isn't a sign of cancer. Other causes of vulval pain Pain in the vulva isn't always vulvodynia. It can have a number of other causes, such as: persistent vaginal thrush or other vaginal infections sensitivity to something touching the vulva, such as soap, bubble bath or medicated creams (known as irritant contact dermatitis) a drop in the hormone oestrogen causing dryness of the vulva, particularly during the menopause a recurrent herpes infection lichen sclerosus or lichen planus (skin conditions that can cause intense irritation and soreness of the vulva) in rare cases, Behcet's disease (a condition of the blood vessels that can cause genital ulcers) or Sjogren's syndrome (a disorder of the immune system that can cause vaginal dryness) Your doctor may want to rule out these conditions before treating you for vulvodynia. Some women can have a combination of problems, for example recurrent thrush and vulvodynia, with both needing proper treatment to reduce pain. Support and more information Living with a long-term painful condition such as vulvodynia can be frustrating and stressful. You may find it useful to contact a support group for more information and advice or to get in touch with other women who have vulvodynia. Two of the main support groups are: the Vulval Pain Society  the Pelvic Pain Support Network Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/06\/2016 Next review due: 09\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 157 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Vagina health Vaginismus Living with pain External links Vulval Pain Society Pelvic Pain Support Network: vulval pain How to get NHS help for long-term pain Find out how to get help from your GP or local hospital if you have persistent pain Vagina health Find out about vaginas, from keeping clean and healthy to what's normal and what's not. Plus, changes after childbirth NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vulvodynia (persistent vulval pain)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vulvodynia","content":"Vulvodynia (vulval pain) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vulvodynia (vulval pain)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview vulvodynia Clinical trials Vulvodynia   Vulvodynia is persistent, unexplained pain in the vulva (the skin surrounding the entrance to the vagina). It can affect women of all ages, and often occurs in women who are otherwise healthy. Vulvodynia can be a long-term (chronic) problem that's very distressing to live with, but much can be done to help relieve the pain. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Treatments Possible causes Other causes of vulval pain Support and more information Symptoms of vulvodynia The main symptom of vulvodynia is persistent pain in and around the vulva. The vulva usually looks normal. The pain may be: a burning, stinging or sore sensation triggered by touch, such as during sex or when inserting a tampon constantly in the background and can be worse when sitting limited to part of the vulva, such as the opening of the vagina more widespread \u2013 sometimes it can spread to the buttocks and inner thighs Some women also have problems such as vaginismus (where the muscles around the vagina tighten involuntarily), interstitial cystitis (a painful bladder condition), painful periods and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Having chronic pain can also affect relationships, reduce sex drive, and cause low mood and depression. Pain in the genital area is often difficult to talk about with friends and it's not uncommon to feel isolated. When to get medical advice See your GP or visit your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic if you have persistent vulval pain. Vulvodynia is unlikely to get better on its own and some of the treatments are only available on prescription. There are also a number of other causes of vulval pain that need to be ruled out. Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and may touch your vulva lightly with the tip of a cotton bud to see if this causes pain. A swab may also be taken to check for conditions such as infections. Many people with vulval pain can have the condition for many years before a diagnosis is made and proper management started. The British Society for the Study of Vulval Disease has a map of vulval clinics and services in the UK that you can use to search for services near you. You can't self-refer to these services, but you could discuss a referral with your GP. Treatments for vulvodynia A combination of some of the following treatments can often help relieve symptoms of vulvodynia and reduce its impact on your life: Self-care Gels and lubricants Medication Physiotherapy Therapy and counselling Surgery Self-care The following lifestyle tips may help reduce symptoms of vulvodynia: Wear 100% cotton underwear and loose-fitting skirts or trousers. Avoid scented hygiene products such as feminine wipes, bubble bath and soap \u2013 an emollient is a good substitute for soap. Apply cool gel packs to your vulva to soothe the pain. Use petroleum jelly before swimming to provide protection from chlorine. Try not to avoid sex or touching your vulva completely, as this may make your vulva more sensitive \u2013 if sex is painful, try to find a position that's more comfortable, or if penetration is painful do other sexually intimate activities together until you've sought advice. Try to reduce stress, as it can increase the pain of vulvodynia \u2013 read some relaxation tips to relieve stress. For pain when sitting, using a doughnut-shaped cushion can help. Over-the-counter gels and lubricants Applying the anaesthetic gel lidocaine to your vulva about 10 minutes before sex may make it more comfortable. To stop the gel getting on your partner, either wipe it off just before having sex or ask your partner to wear a condom (if using condoms, use latex-free ones as latex condoms can be damaged by lidocaine). If your pain is more constant, applying lidocaine regularly throughout the day may help. Lidocaine can also be used overnight. A tip is to put some on a cotton make-up removal pad and put it onto the sore area so it's held in place by your underwear. It's very common to have some burning when the lidocaine is initially applied which can last several minutes before going numb. Try to give the lidocaine time it to work, but if the burning continues for 10 minutes, wash it off thoroughly. Tubes of 5% lidocaine gel, cream or ointment can be bought over the counter from a pharmacy, although it's a good idea to get a doctor's advice before trying it. Vaginal lubricants and aqueous cream (also available over the counter) may soothe the area and help moisturise the vulva if it's dry. Speak to your pharmacist about these treatments. Prescription medication Conventional painkillers such as paracetamol won't usually relieve the pain of vulvodynia. But several medications available on prescription can help, including: antidepressants called amitriptyline and nortriptyline \u2013 possible side effects include drowsiness, weight gain and dry mouth anti-epilepsy medicines called gabapentin and pregabalin \u2013 possible side effects include dizziness, drowsiness and weight gain Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose and gradually increase it until your pain subsides. You may need to take the medication for several months. If you have pain in a specific area of your vulva, injections of local anaesthetic and steroid medication into a nearby nerve may provide temporary pain relief. Physiotherapy A physiotherapist can teach you some pelvic floor exercises (such as squeezing and releasing your pelvic floor muscles) to help relax the muscles around your vagina. Another technique to relax the muscles in the vagina and desensitise it involves using a set of vaginal trainers. These are smooth cones of gradually increasing size and length which can be inserted into your vagina in the privacy of your own home. Some physiotherapists may also suggest trying TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) to reduce your pain. This is where a machine is used to deliver a mild electrical current to the painful area. Therapy and counselling Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a type of therapy that aims to help you manage your problems by changing how you think and act. It can often help women cope with the impact that vulvodynia has on their life. CBT focuses on the problems and difficulties you have now, and looks for practical ways you can improve your state of mind on a daily basis. Psychosexual counselling is helpful when pain is affecting intimacy between you and your partner. This is a type of therapy that aims to address problems such as fear and anxiety about sex, and to restore a physical relationship with your partner. Surgery Only in very rare cases, surgery to remove part of the vulva may be an option. Pain however can recur and it's usually not recommended. Possible causes of vulvodynia The exact cause of vulvodynia is unknown. It's thought it may be the result of a problem with the nerves supplying the vulva, although it's not clear what causes this. Possible triggers that have been suggested include damage due to previous surgery or childbirth, trapped nerves or a history of severe vaginal thrush. Vulvodynia is not contagious. It has nothing to do with personal hygiene and isn't a sign of cancer. Other causes of vulval pain Pain in the vulva isn't always vulvodynia. It can have a number of other causes, such as: persistent vaginal thrush or other vaginal infections sensitivity to something touching the vulva, such as soap, bubble bath or medicated creams (known as irritant contact dermatitis) a drop in the hormone oestrogen causing dryness of the vulva, particularly during the menopause a recurrent herpes infection lichen sclerosus or lichen planus (skin conditions that can cause intense irritation and soreness of the vulva) in rare cases, Behcet's disease (a condition of the blood vessels that can cause genital ulcers) or Sjogren's syndrome (a disorder of the immune system that can cause vaginal dryness) Your doctor may want to rule out these conditions before treating you for vulvodynia. Some women can have a combination of problems, for example recurrent thrush and vulvodynia, with both needing proper treatment to reduce pain. Support and more information Living with a long-term painful condition such as vulvodynia can be frustrating and stressful. You may find it useful to contact a support group for more information and advice or to get in touch with other women who have vulvodynia. Two of the main support groups are: the Vulval Pain Society  the Pelvic Pain Support Network Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/06\/2016 Next review due: 09\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 157 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Vagina health Vaginismus Living with pain External links Vulval Pain Society Pelvic Pain Support Network: vulval pain How to get NHS help for long-term pain Find out how to get help from your GP or local hospital if you have persistent pain Vagina health Find out about vaginas, from keeping clean and healthy to what's normal and what's not. Plus, changes after childbirth NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}