{"conditions":[{"name":"Ulcer venous, leg","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Leg-ulcer-venous","content":"Venous leg ulcer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Venous leg ulcer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Leg-ulcer-venous Clinical trials Venous leg ulcer Leg-ulcer-venous Symptoms Leg-ulcer-venous Causes Leg-ulcer-venous Diagnosis Leg-ulcer-venous Treatment Leg-ulcer-venous Prevention Introduction  A leg ulcer is a long-lasting (chronic) sore that takes more than four to six weeks to heal. They usually develop on the inside of the leg, just above the ankle. The symptoms of a venous leg ulcer include pain, itching and swelling in the affected leg. There may also be discoloured or hardened skin around the ulcer, and the sore may produce a foul-smelling discharge. See your GP if you think you have a leg ulcer, as it will need specialist treatment to help it heal. Your GP will examine your leg and may carry out additional tests to rule out other conditions. Read more about how a venous leg ulcer is diagnosed. What causes venous leg ulcers? A venous leg ulcer is the most common type of leg ulcer, accounting for over 90% of all cases. Venous leg ulcers can develop after a minor injury, where persistently high pressure in the veins of the legs has damaged the skin. Read more about the causes of venous leg ulcers. Who's affected? Venous leg ulcers are estimated to affect around 1 in 500 people in the UK, although they become much more common with age. It's estimated that around 1 in 50 people over the age of 80 has one. You're more at risk of developing one if you've previously had deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or find it difficult to walk because of a problem such as: osteoarthritis a leg injury obesity paralysis You're also more at risk if you've recently had an operation on your leg, such as a hip replacement or knee replacement. People with varicose veins (swollen and enlarged veins) also have a higher risk of developing venous leg ulcers. How venous leg ulcers are treated Most venous leg ulcers heal within three to four months if they're treated by a healthcare professional trained in compression therapy for leg ulcers. However, some ulcers may take longer to heal, and a very small number never heal. Treatment usually involves: cleaning and dressing the wound using compression, such as bandages or stockings, to improve the flow of blood in the legs Antibiotics may also be used if the ulcer becomes infected, but they don't help ulcers to heal. However, unless the underlying cause of the ulcer is addressed, there's a high risk of a venous leg ulcer recurring after treatment. Underlying causes could include immobility, obesity, previous DVT, or varicose veins. Read more about treating venous leg ulcers. Can venous leg ulcers be prevented? There are several ways to help prevent a venous leg ulcer in people at risk, such as:  wearing compression stockings losing weight if you're overweight exercising regularly elevating your leg when possible This is particularly important if you've previously had a leg ulcer \u2013 once a leg has suffered a venous ulcer, you're at risk of further ulcers developing within months or years. Read more about preventing venous leg ulcers. Other types of leg ulcer Other common types of leg ulcer include: arterial leg ulcers \u2013 caused by poor blood circulation in the arteries diabetic leg ulcers \u2013 caused by the high blood sugar associated with diabetes vasculitic leg ulcers \u2013 associated with chronic inflammatory disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus traumatic leg ulcers \u2013 caused by injury to the leg malignant leg ulcers \u2013 caused by a tumour of the skin of the leg Most ulcers caused by artery disease or diabetes occur on the foot rather than the leg. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2016 Next review due: 02\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 346 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Varicose veins Deep vein thrombosis Hypertension Oedema Varicose eczema External links British Association of Dermatologists Circulation Foundation The Lindsay Leg Club Foundation Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ulcer, peptic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Peptic-ulcer","content":"Stomach ulcer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stomach ulcer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Peptic-ulcer Clinical trials Stomach ulcer Peptic-ulcer Symptoms Peptic-ulcer Causes Peptic-ulcer Diagnosis Peptic-ulcer Treatment Peptic-ulcer Complications Introduction  Stomach ulcers, also known as gastric ulcers, are open sores that develop on the lining of the stomach. Ulcers can also occur in part of the intestine just beyond the stomach \u2013 these are known as duodenal ulcers. Both stomach and duodenal ulcers are sometimes referred to as peptic ulcers. Here the term \u201Cstomach ulcer\u201D will be used, although the information applies equally to duodenal ulcers. Signs and symptoms The most common symptom of a stomach ulcer is a burning or gnawing pain in the centre of the abdomen (tummy). However, stomach ulcers aren't always painful and some people may experience other symptoms, such as indigestion, heartburn and feeling sick. Read more about the symptoms of a stomach ulcer and diagnosing a stomach ulcer. When to seek medical advice You should visit your GP if you think you may have a stomach ulcer. Seek urgent medical advice if you experience any of the following symptoms: vomiting blood \u2013 the blood can appear bright red or have a dark brown, grainy appearance, similar to coffee grounds passing dark, sticky, tar-like stools a sudden, sharp pain in your tummy that gets steadily worse These could be a sign of a serious complication, such as internal bleeding (see below). What causes stomach ulcers? Stomach ulcers occur when the layer that protects the stomach lining from stomach acid breaks down, which allows the stomach lining to become damaged. This is usually a result of : an infection with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) bacteria taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen or aspirin \u2013 particularly if they're taken for a long time or at high doses It used to be thought that stress or certain foods might cause stomach ulcers, but there's little evidence to suggest this is the case. Read more about the causes of stomach ulcers. Who is affected It's not known how many people have stomach ulcers, although they're thought to be quite common. Some studies have found that around 1 in 10 people may get a stomach ulcer at some point in their life. Stomach ulcers can affect people of any age, including children, but mostly occur in people aged 60 or over. Men are more commonly affected than women. How stomach ulcers are treated With treatment, most stomach ulcers will heal within a month or two. The treatment recommended for you will depend on what caused the ulcer. Most people will be prescribed a medication called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) to reduce the amount of acid their stomach produces, and allow the ulcer to heal naturally. If an H. pylori infection is responsible for the ulcers, antibiotics will also be used to kill the bacteria, which should prevent the ulcer coming back. If the ulcers are caused by the use of NSAIDs, PPIs are usually prescribed and your doctor will discuss whether you should keep using NSAIDs. Alternative medication to NSAIDs, such as paracetamol, may be recommended. Stomach ulcers can come back after treatment, although this is less likely to happen if the underlying cause is addressed. Read more about treating stomach ulcers. Possible complications Complications of stomach ulcers are relatively uncommon, but they can be very serious and potentially life-threatening. The main complications include: bleeding at the site of the ulcer the stomach lining at the site of the ulcer splitting open \u2013 known as perforation the ulcer blocking the movement of food through the digestive system \u2013 known as gastric obstruction Read more about the complications of stomach ulcers. Page last reviewed: 21\/05\/2015 Next review due: 21\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 718 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 345  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 208  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Peptic ulcer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A peptic ulcer is a painful condition that affects as many as one in eight people in the UK. But sufferers don\u2019t have to put up with the discomfort. There are now effective ways of getting rid of ulcers. Dr John Bennett explains. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Abdominal (tummy) pain Digestive health NSAIDs External links CORE charity: peptic ulcers Lab Tests Online UK: H. pylori test Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Find and choose services for stomach ulcer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ulcerative colitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ulcerative-colitis","content":"Ulcerative colitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ulcerative colitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ulcerative-colitis Real stories Ulcerative-colitis Clinical trials Ulcerative colitis Ulcerative-colitis Causes Ulcerative-colitis Diagnosis Ulcerative-colitis Treatment Ulcerative-colitis Complications Ulcerative-colitis Living with Introduction  Ulcerative colitis is a long-term condition, where the colon and rectum become inflamed. The colon is the large intestine (bowel), and the rectum is the end of the bowel where stools are stored. Small ulcers can develop on the colon's lining, and can bleed and produce pus. Symptoms of ulcerative colitis The main symptoms of ulcerative colitis are: recurring diarrhoea, which may contain blood, mucus or pus abdominal (tummy) pain needing to empty your bowels frequently You may also experience fatigue (extreme tiredness), loss of appetite and weight loss. The severity of the symptoms varies, depending on how much of the rectum and colon is inflamed and how severe the inflammation is. For some people, the condition has a significant impact on their everyday lives. Symptoms of a flare-up Some people may go for weeks or months with very mild symptoms, or none at all (known as remission), followed by periods where the symptoms are particularly troublesome (known as flare-ups or relapses). During a flare-up, some people with ulcerative colitis also experience symptoms elsewhere in their body. For example, some people develop: painful and swollen joints (arthritis) mouth ulcers areas of painful, red and swollen skin irritated and red eyes In severe cases, defined as having to empty your bowels six or more times a day, additional symptoms may include: shortness of breath a fast or irregular heartbeat a high temperature (fever) blood in your stools becoming more obvious In most people, no specific trigger for flare-ups is identified, although a gut infection can occasionally be the cause. Stress is also thought to be a potential factor. Read more about living with ulcerative colitis. When to seek medical advice You should see your GP as soon as possible if you have symptoms of ulcerative colitis and you haven't been diagnosed with the condition. They can arrange blood or stool sample tests to help determine what may be causing your symptoms. If necessary, they can refer you to hospital for further tests. Read more about diagnosing ulcerative colitis. If you've been diagnosed with ulcerative colitis and think you may be having a severe flare-up, contact your GP or care team for advice. You may need to be admitted to hospital. If you can't contact your GP or care team, call NHS 111 or contact your local out-of-hours service. What causes ulcerative colitis? Ulcerative colitis is thought to be an autoimmune condition. This means the immune system \u2013 the body's defence against infection \u2013 goes wrong and attacks healthy tissue. The most popular theory is that the immune system mistakes harmless bacteria inside the colon for a threat and attacks the tissues of the colon, causing it to become inflamed. Exactly what causes the immune system to behave in this way is unclear. Most experts think it's a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Read more about the causes of ulcerative colitis. Who's affected? It's estimated that around 1 in every 420 people living in the UK has ulcerative colitis; this amounts to around 146,000 people. The condition can develop at any age, but is most often diagnosed in people from 15 to 25 years old. It's more common in white people of European descent (especially those descended from Ashkenazi Jewish communities) and black people. The condition is rarer in people from Asian backgrounds (although the reasons for this are unclear). Both men and women seem to be equally affected by ulcerative colitis. How ulcerative colitis is treated Treatment for ulcerative colitis aims to relieve symptoms during a flare-up and prevent symptoms from returning (known as maintaining remission). In most people, this is achieved by taking medication such as: aminosalicylates (ASAs) corticosteroids immunosuppressants Mild to moderate flare-ups can usually be treated at home. However, more severe flare-ups need to be treated in hospital to reduce the risk of serious complications, such as the colon becoming stretched and enlarged or developing large ulcers. Both of these can increase the risk of developing a hole in the bowel. If medications aren't effective at controlling your symptoms, or your quality of life is significantly affected by your condition, surgery to remove your colon may be an option. During surgery, your small intestine will either be diverted out of an opening in your abdomen (known as an ileostomy), or used to create an internal pouch that's connected to your anus (known as an ileo-anal pouch). Read more about: treating ulcerative colitis complications of ulcerative colitis IBD or IBS? Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a term mainly used to describe two conditions that cause inflammation of the gut (gastrointestinal tract). They are: ulcerative colitis Crohn's disease IBD shouldn't be confused with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), which is a different condition and requires different treatment. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/03\/2016 Next review due: 17\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 473 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 197  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 156  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Crohn's disease Diarrhoea Corticosteroids Ileostomy Bowel cancer External links Crohn's and Colitis UK Children with Colitis The Ileostomy and Internal Pouch Support Group NICE: managing ulcerative colitis IBD Standards NICE: infliximab for ulcerative colitis Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Find and choose services for Ulcerative colitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ultrasound scan","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ultrasound-scan","content":"Ultrasound scan - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ultrasound scan  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ultrasound-scan Clinical trials Ultrasound scan   An ultrasound scan, sometimes called a sonogram, is a procedure that uses high-frequency sound waves to create an image of part of the inside of the body. An ultrasound scan can be used to monitor an unborn baby, diagnose a condition, or guide a surgeon during certain procedures. How ultrasound scans work A small device called an ultrasound probe is used, which gives off high-frequency sound waves. You can't hear these sound waves, but when they bounce off different parts of the body, they create \"echoes\" that are picked up by the probe and turned into a moving image. This image is displayed on a monitor while the scan is carried out. Preparing for an ultrasound scan Before having some types of ultrasound scan, you may be asked to follow certain instructions to help improve the quality of the images produced. For example, you may be advised to: drink water and not go to the toilet until after the scan \u2013 this may be needed before a scan of your unborn baby or your pelvic area avoid eating for several hours before the scan \u2013 this may be needed before a scan of your digestive system, including the liver and gallbladder Depending on the area of your body being examined, the hospital may ask you to remove some clothing and wear a hospital gown. If you need a sedative to help you relax, this will be given through a small tube into the back of your hand or into your arm. In some cases, you may also be given an injection of a harmless substance called a contrast agent before the scan, as this can make the images clearer. What happens during an ultrasound scan Most ultrasound scans last between 15 and 45 minutes. They usually take place in a hospital radiology department and are performed either by a radiologist or a sonographer. They can also be carried out in community locations such as GP practices and may be performed by other healthcare professionals, such as midwives or physiotherapists who have been specially trained in ultrasound. There are different kinds of ultrasound scans, depending on which part of the body is being scanned and why. The three main types are: external ultrasound scan \u2013 the probe is moved over the skin internal ultrasound scan \u2013 the probe is inserted into the body endoscopic ultrasound scan \u2013 the probe is attached to a long, thin, flexible tube (an endoscope) and passed further into the body These techniques are described below. External ultrasound scan An external ultrasound scan is most often used to examine your heart or an unborn baby in your womb. It can also be used to examine the liver, kidneys and other organs in the tummy and pelvis, as well as other organs or tissues that can be assessed through the skin, such as muscles and joints. A small handheld probe is placed onto your skin, and moved over the part of the body being examined. A lubricating gel is put onto your skin to allow the probe to move smoothly. This also ensures there is continuous contact between the probe and the skin. You should not feel anything other than the sensor and gel on your skin (which is often cold). If you are having a scan of your womb or pelvic area, you may have a full bladder that causes you a little discomfort. There will be a toilet nearby to empty your bladder once the scan is complete. Internal or transvaginal ultrasound scan An internal examination allows a doctor to look more closely inside the body at organs such as the prostate gland, ovaries or womb. A 'transvaginal' ultrasound means 'through the vagina'. During the procedure, you'll be asked to either lie on your back, or on your side with your knees drawn up towards your chest. A small ultrasound probe with a sterile cover, not much wider than a finger, is then gently passed into the vagina or rectum, and images are transmitted to a monitor. Internal examinations may cause some discomfort, but don't usually cause any pain and shouldn't take very long. Endoscopic ultrasound scan During an endoscopic ultrasound scan, an endoscope is inserted into your body, usually through your mouth, to examine areas such as your stomach or gullet (oesophagus). You'll usually be asked to lie on your side as the endoscope is carefully pushed down towards your stomach. The endoscope has a light and an ultrasound device on the end. Once it has been inserted into the body, sound waves are used to create images in the same way as an external ultrasound. You'll usually be given a sedative to keep you calm and local anaesthetic spray to numb your throat, as an endoscopic ultrasound scan can be uncomfortable and may make you feel sick. You may also be given a mouth guard to keep your mouth open and protect your teeth, in case you bite the endoscope. After an ultrasound scan In most cases, there are no after-effects and you can go home soon after the scan is finished. If a sedative wasn't used, you can drive, eat, drink and return to your other normal activities straight away. If you had an endoscopic ultrasound and were given a sedative to help you relax, you'll usually be advised to stay in hospital for a few hours, until the medication starts to wear off. You'll need to arrange for someone to pick you up from the hospital and stay with you for the next 24 hours. You shouldn't drive, drink alcohol or operate machinery during this time. You may be told the results of your scan soon after it's been carried out, but in most cases the images will need to be analysed and a report will be sent to the doctor who referred you for the scan. They will discuss the results with you a few days later or at your next appointment, if one has been arranged. Are there any risks or side effects? There are no known risks from the sound waves used in an ultrasound scan. Unlike some other scans, such as computerised tomography (CT) scans, ultrasound scans don't involve exposure to radiation. External and internal ultrasound scans don't have any side effects and are generally painless, although you may experience some discomfort as the probe is pressed over your skin or inserted into your body. If you\u2019re having an internal scan and you\u2019re allergic to latex, it\u2019s important to let the sonographer or doctor carrying out the scan know this, so they can use a latex-free probe cover. Endoscopic ultrasounds can be a bit more uncomfortable and they can cause temporary side effects, such as a sore throat or bloating. There's also a small risk of more serious complications, such as internal bleeding. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 04\/06\/2015 Next review due: 04\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 526 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 267  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 92  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links CT scan MRI scan Ultrasound scans in pregnancy X-ray External links Antenatal Results and Choices Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: patient information Outpatients and day patients Find out what happens on the day of your hospital outpatient appointment Antenatal checks and tests Find out about the checks, tests and screening you'll be offered in pregnancy, including blood and urine tests NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Mid-pregnancy anomaly scan","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/anomaly-scan-18-19-20-21-weeks-pregnant.aspx","content":"Mid-pregnancy anomaly scan - Pregnancy and baby - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Anomaly scan at 18-21 weeks pregnant This detailed ultrasound scan, sometimes called the mid-pregnancy or 20-week scan, is usually carried out when you are between 18 and 21 weeks pregnant. In some areas it may be carried out later than 21 weeks. The scan checks for major physical abnormalities in your baby, although it can't pick up every problem. The anomaly scan is carried out in the same way as the dating scan, with gel on your tummy and the sonographer passing the ultrasound device backwards and forwards over your skin. You will be offered a scan that produces a two-dimensional (2-D) black and white image that gives only a side view of the baby. The NHS screening programme does not use 3-D or colour images. The anomaly scan is offered to everybody, but you do not have to have it if you do not want to. The scan is a medical examination. You will be asked to give your permission for it to be carried out. Make sure you understand what is going to happen, and feel free to ask any questions. What is the scan for? The mid-pregnancy anomaly scan looks for some physical abnormalities in the baby. The scan only looks for these problems and cannot find everything that might be wrong. What kind of problems does the scan look for? The scan looks in detail at the baby's bones, heart, brain, spinal cord, face, kidneys and abdomen. It allows the sonographer to look specifically for 11 conditions, some of which are very rare. For an information leaflet on each of these conditions, including treatment options, click on the links below: anencephaly open spina bifida cleft lip   diaphragmatic hernia  gastrochisis  exomphalos  serious cardiac abnormalities  bilateral renal agenesis lethal skeletal dysplasia  Edwards' syndrome, or T18  Patau's syndrome, or T13   In most cases, the scan will show that the baby appears to be developing normally, but sometimes the sonographer will find or suspect a problem. Some problems can be seen more clearly than others. For example, some babies have a problem called open spina bifida, which affects the spinal cord. Spina bifida can usually be seen clearly on a scan, and will be detected in around 9 out of 10 babies who have this problem. Some other problems, such as heart defects, are more difficult to see. The scan will find about half of those babies who have heart defects. Some of the problems that can be seen on the scan, such as cleft lip, will mean the baby may need treatment or extra surgery after they are born. In a small number of cases, some very serious problems are found \u2013 for example, the baby's brain, kidneys, internal organs or bones may not have developed properly. In some very serious, rare cases where no treatment is possible, the baby will die soon after it is born or may die during pregnancy. What happens at the scan? Most scans are carried out by specially trained staff called sonographers. The scan is carried out in a dimly lit room so the sonographer can get good images of the baby. You will be asked to lie on a couch and to lower your skirt or trousers to your hips and lift your top to your chest so your abdomen is uncovered. The sonographer or their assistant will tuck tissue paper around your clothing to protect it from the gel, which will be put on your tummy. The sonographer then passes a handheld probe over your skin to examine the baby's body. The gel makes sure there is good contact between the probe and your skin. A black and white image of the baby will appear on the ultrasound screen. Having the scan does not hurt, but the sonographer may need to apply slight pressure to get the best views of the baby. This might be uncomfortable. The sonographer needs to keep the screen in a position that gives them a good view of the baby. The screen may be directly facing them, or at an angle. Sometimes the sonographer doing the scan will need to be quiet while they concentrate on checking your baby. However, they will be able to talk to you about the pictures once they've completed the check. The appointment for the mid-pregnancy scan usually takes around 30 minutes. Sometimes it is difficult to get a good picture if the baby is lying in an awkward position, if they are moving around a lot, or if you are above average weight. This does not mean there is anything to worry about. You may need to have a full bladder when you come for the appointment. The doctor or midwife looking after you will let you know before you come. If you are not sure, you can contact them and ask. Can my partner or a friend come to the scan with me? Yes. The mid-pregnancy scan can sometimes find problems with the baby. You may like someone to come with you to the scan appointment. Most hospitals do not allow children to attend scans as childcare is not usually available. Please ask your hospital about this before your appointment. Can the scan harm me or my baby? There are no known risks to the baby or you from having an ultrasound scan, but it is important to think carefully about whether to have the scan or not. The scan may provide information that may mean you have to make some important decisions. For example, you may be offered further tests that have a risk of miscarriage, and you will need to decide whether or not to have these tests.  Do I have to have this scan? No, you do not have to have the scan \u2013 it is your choice whether to have it or not. Some people want to find out if their baby has problems and some do not. If you choose not to have the scan, your antenatal care will continue as normal.  When will I get the results of the scan? The sonographer will be able to tell you the results of the scan at the time. What if the scan shows a possible problem? Most scans show that the baby seems to be developing normally and no problems are found. If any problem is found or suspected, the sonographer may ask for another member of staff to look at the scan and give a second opinion. Scans cannot find all problems, and there is always a chance that a baby may be born with a health problem that scans could not have seen. Will I need any further tests? If the scan shows that there might be a problem, you may be offered another test to find out for certain. If you are offered further tests, you will be given more information about the tests so you can decide whether or not you want to have them. You will be able to discuss this with your midwife or consultant. If necessary, you will be referred to a specialist, possibly in another hospital. Find out more about what may happen if a screening test shows a possible problem. Page last reviewed: 25\/02\/2015 Next review due: 25\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 81 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful External links National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): your antenatal care National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): your multiple pregnancy NHS Screening: Screening tests for you and your baby Antenatal Results and Choices charity Related articles Screening tests in pregnancy Screening for Down's syndrome Your antenatal appointments Find out when your antenatal appointments will happen, and what to expect Ultrasound scans Find out about scans in pregnancy and discovering whether you're having a girl or boy Meet the antenatal team Find out who's who in the team that provides your antenatal care Services near you Find and compare services Services Antenatal classes Antenatal support services GP Hospital Maternity services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy dating scan","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/dating-scan-ultrasound-10-11-12-13-weeks-pregnant.aspx","content":"Dating ultrasound baby scan - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: The pregnancy dating scan All pregnant women are offered an ultrasound scan at around 8-14 weeks of pregnancy. This scan is called the dating scan. It's used to see how far along in your pregnancy you are and check your baby's development. Your midwife or doctor will book you a dating scan appointment. It will usually take place at your local hospital ultrasound department. The person performing the scan is called a sonographer. You may need to have a full bladder for this scan, as this makes the ultrasound image clearer. You can ask your midwife or doctor before the scan if this is the case. The scan usually takes around 20 minutes. Find out more about what happens during a pregnancy ultrasound scan. What is the purpose of the dating scan? The purpose of the dating scan is to: find out how many weeks pregnant you are and work out your due date (the estimated date of delivery, or EDD) check whether you are expecting more than one baby check that the baby is growing in the right place check your baby's development Some abnormalities may also be detected at this scan, such as neural tube defects (spina bifida is a type of neural tube defect). Does screening for Down's syndrome happen at this scan? This depends on whether you have agreed to have the screening and when the scan takes place. Screening for Down's syndrome will happen at the dating scan if: you have agreed to have screening for the condition the scan takes place between 11 and 14 weeks of pregnancy The screening test for Down's syndrome used at this stage of pregnancy is called the combined test. The combined test involves a blood test and measuring the fluid at the back of the baby's neck (nuchal translucency) with an ultrasound scan. This is sometimes called a nuchal translucency scan. The nuchal translucency measurement can be taken during the dating scan. If you have agreed to have screening for Down's syndrome, the dating scan and the screening will usually happen at the same time. Find out more about the combined screening test for Down's syndrome. You will not be offered the combined screening test if your dating scan happens after 14 weeks. Instead, you will be offered another blood test between 14 and 20 weeks of pregnancy to screen for the risk of Down's syndrome. This test is not quite as accurate as the combined test. Find out more about:  the mid-pregnancy anomaly scan screening for Down's syndrome ultrasound scans in pregnancy  Page last reviewed: 25\/02\/2015 Next review due: 25\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 9 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Screening tests in pregnancy Screening for Down's syndrome External links National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): your antenatal care National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): your multiple pregnancy NHS Screening: Screening tests for you and your baby Anomaly scan What to expect at the pregnancy anomaly scan at 18-21 weeks If antenatal screening finds a problem Next steps if screening tests show something might be wrong Services near you Find and compare services Services Antenatal classes Antenatal support services GP Hospital Maternity services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy scans","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/ultrasound-anomaly-baby-scans-pregnant.aspx","content":"Ultrasound scans in pregnancy - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Ultrasound scans in pregnancy Video Player Search Enter a search term: Add question Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. What happens at a scan and what will they tell me? Media last reviewed: 20\/03\/2014 Next review due: 20\/03\/2017 Ultrasound scans Ultrasound scans use sound waves to build a picture of the baby in the womb. The scans are completely painless, have no known side effects on mothers or babies, and can be carried out at any stage of pregnancy. Talk to your midwife, GP or obstetrician about any concerns you have. For many women, ultrasound scans are the highlight of pregnancy. It's very exciting to \"see\" your baby in the womb, often moving his or her hands and legs. Having a scan in pregnancy is usually a happy event, but be aware that ultrasound scans may detect some serious abnormalities, so you should be prepared for that information. See What if a screening test shows a possible problem? for more information on what may happen if a scan or other screening test suggests an abnormality. What will happen in the scan room? Most scans are carried out by specially trained staff called sonographers. The procedure is carried out in a dimly lit room so the sonographer is able to get good images of your baby. You will first be asked to lie on a couch. You will then be asked to lower your skirt or trousers to your hips and raise your top to your chest. The sonographer will put ultrasound gel on your tummy and tuck tissue paper around your clothing to protect it from the gel. The gel makes sure there is good contact between the machine and your skin. The sonographer passes a handheld device called a probe over your skin. It is this probe that sends out ultrasound waves and picks them up when they bounce back. A black and white picture of the baby will appear on the ultrasound screen. During the examination, sonographers need to keep the screen in a position that gives them a good view of the baby \u2013 either directly facing them or at an angle. The sonographer will carefully examine your baby's body. Having the scan does not hurt, but the sonographer may need to apply slight pressure to get the best views of the baby. How long will a scan take? A scan usually takes around 20 minutes. However, the sonographer may not be able to get good views if your baby is lying in an awkward position or moving around a lot. If you are overweight or your body tissue is dense, sometimes this can reduce the quality of the image because there is more tissue for the ultrasound waves to get through before they reach the baby. If it is difficult to get a good image, the scan may take longer or have to be repeated at another time. Can an ultrasound scan harm me or my baby? There are no known risks to the baby or the mother from having an ultrasound scan, but it is important that you consider carefully whether to have the scan or not. The scan can provide information that may mean you have to make further important decisions. For example, you may be offered further tests that have a risk of miscarriage. When will scans be offered?   Hospitals offer all pregnant women at least two ultrasound scans during their pregnancy: at 8 to 14 weeks, and between 18 and 21 weeks The first scan is sometimes called the dating scan. The sonographer estimates when your baby is due (the estimated date of delivery, or EDD) based on the baby's measurements. The dating scan can include a nuchal translucency (NT) scan, which is part of the combined screening test for Down's syndrome. The second scan offered to all pregnant women is called the anomaly scan, or mid-pregnancy scan, and usually takes place between 18 and 21 weeks of pregnancy. This scan checks for structural abnormalities (anomalies) in the baby. Some women may be offered more than two scans, depending on their health and their pregnancy. You can find out more about the dating scan and the anomaly or mid-pregnancy scan. When will I get the results? The sonographer will be able to tell you the results of the scan at the time. Do I have to have ultrasound scans? No, not if you don't want to. Some people want to find out if their baby has problems, while others don't. The dating scan and anomaly scan are offered to all women, but you don't have to accept them. Your choice will be respected if you decide not to have the scans, and your antenatal care will continue as normal. You'll be given the chance to discuss it with your maternity team before making your decision. What can an ultrasound scan be used for? An ultrasound scan can be used to: check your baby's size \u2013 at the dating scan, this gives a better idea of how many weeks pregnant you are; your due date, which is originally calculated from the first day of your last period, will be adjusted according to the ultrasound measurements check whether you're having more than one baby detect some abnormalities show the position of your baby and the placenta \u2013 for example, when the placenta is low down in late pregnancy, a caesarean section may be advised check that the baby is growing normally \u2013 this is particularly important if you're carrying twins, or you have had problems in this pregnancy or a previous pregnancy Can I bring family or friends with me when I have the scan? Yes. Ultrasound scans can sometimes find problems with the baby. You may like someone to come with you to the scan appointment. Most hospitals do not allow children to attend scans as childcare is not usually available. Please ask you hospital about this before your appointment. Remember, an ultrasound scan is an important medical examination and it is treated in the same way as any other hospital investigation. If everything appears normal, what happens next? Most scans show that the baby is developing normally and no problems are found. This is because most babies are healthy and do not have abnormalities. If the scan finds there might be a problem, what happens next? If a problem is found or suspected, the sonographer may ask for a second opinion from another member of staff. You might be offered another test to find out for certain if there is a problem. If you are offered further tests, you will be given more information about them so you can decide whether or not you want to have them. You will be able to discuss this with your midwife or consultant. If necessary, you will be referred to a specialist, possibly in another hospital. Is it a girl or a boy? Finding out the sex of your baby is not offered as part of the national screening programme, but this depends on the policy of your hospital. If you want to find out the sex of your baby, you can usually do so during the mid-pregnancy scan. Tell the sonographer at the start of the scan that you'd like to know your baby's sex. Be aware, though, that it's not always possible for the sonographer to be 100% certain about your baby's sex. For example, if your baby is lying in an awkward position, it may be difficult or impossible to tell. Some hospitals have a policy of not telling patients the sex of their baby. Speak to your sonographer or midwife to find out more. Can I have a picture of my baby? You will need to check if your hospital provides this service. If they do, there may be a charge. Page last reviewed: 25\/02\/2015 Next review due: 25\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 277 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 136  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Antenatal checks and tests Screening for abnormalities  When pregnancy goes wrong  Who's who in the antenatal team  Your antenatal appointments Find out when your antenatal appointments will happen, and what to expect Services near you Find and compare services Services Antenatal classes Antenatal support services GP Hospital Maternity services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked What the experts say Read the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) best practice guidelines for the care of healthy pregnant women NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Umbilical hernia repair","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Umbilicalhernia","content":"Umbilical hernia repair - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Umbilical hernia repair  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Umbilical hernia repair UmbilicalHernia How it's performed UmbilicalHernia Recovery Introduction  A hernia occurs when an internal part of the body pushes through a weakness in the muscle or surrounding tissue wall. Your muscles are usually strong and tight enough to keep your organs and intestines in place, but a hernia can develop if there are any weak spots. What is an umbilical hernia? Umbilical hernias are very common in infants and young children, especially in babies born prematurely. An umbilical hernia appears as a painless lump in or near the navel (belly button).  It may get bigger when laughing, coughing, crying or going to the toilet and may shrink when relaxing or lying down. In many cases, the umbilical hernia goes back in and the muscles reseal before the child's first birthday. Umbilical hernias can also develop in adults. Without treatment, the hernia will probably get worse over time. For information on other types of hernia, see: inguinal hernia femoral hernia hiatus hernia What causes an umbilical hernia? During pregnancy, the umbilical cord passes through an opening in the baby's abdomen (tummy). This opening should close shortly after birth, but in some cases the muscles don't seal completely. This leaves a weak spot in the surrounding muscle wall (abdominal wall). An umbilical hernia can develop when fatty tissue or a part of the bowel pokes through into an area near the navel. In adults, factors that can contribute to developing an umbilical hernia include: being overweight or obese straining while moving or lifting heavy objects having a persistent heavy cough having a multiple pregnancy (such as twins or triplets) When is surgery needed? If necessary, umbilical hernias can be treated with surgery to push the bulge back into place and strengthen the weakness in the abdominal wall. This operation may be recommended for your child if the hernia is large or hasn't disappeared by the time they reach four or five years old. You'll usually be advised to wait for your child to reach this age because the operation isn't essential unless there are complications. The risk of your child developing complications is very low. However, surgery is recommended for most adults with an umbilical hernia as the hernia is unlikely to get better by itself when you're older and the risk of complications is higher. Complications that can develop as a result of an umbilical hernia include: obstruction \u2013 where a section of the bowel becomes stuck outside the abdomen, causing nausea, vomiting and pain strangulation \u2013 where a section of bowel becomes trapped and its blood supply is cut off; this requires emergency surgery within hours to release the trapped tissue and restore its blood supply so it doesn't die Surgery will get rid of the hernia and prevent any serious complications, although there's a chance of it returning after the operation. Repairing an umbilical hernia An umbilical hernia repair is a relatively simple procedure that normally takes about 20 to 30 minutes to perform. General anaesthetic is usually used so there's no pain while the operation is carried out. The weak spot in the abdominal wall is usually closed with stitches in children. If the hernia is large or in adults, a special mesh may be used to strengthen the area instead. You or your child should be able to go home the same day the operation is carried out, but you may feel a bit sore and uncomfortable while you recover.  Strenuous activities will need to be limited for a few weeks after the operation, and a week or two off school or work is often advised. Most people are able to return to all their normal activities within a month of surgery. Read more about: how an umbilical hernia repair is performed recovering from an umbilical hernia repair Are there any risks from surgery? Complications from an umbilical hernia repair are uncommon, but can include: the wound becoming infected and needing antibiotics the hernia returning feeling sick and having a headache or numbness in the legs a few hours after the operation The belly button often looks normal after surgery, but there's a chance its appearance may change as a result of the operation. Page last reviewed: 29\/09\/2015 Next review due: 29\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 495 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 274  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 120  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Compare hospitals Hernia Services and support for parents External links The British Hernia Centre Your child's hospital stay How to prepare your child for a stay in hospital Find and choose services for umbilical hernia repair Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Underactive thyroid","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thyroid-under-active","content":"Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thyroid-under-active Clinical trials Thyroid-under-active Community Underactive thyroid Thyroid-under-active Symptoms Thyroid-under-active Causes Thyroid-under-active Diagnosis Thyroid-under-active Treatment Thyroid-under-active Complications Introduction  An underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) is where your thyroid gland doesn't produce enough hormones. Common signs of an underactive thyroid are tiredness, weight gain and feeling depressed. An underactive thyroid can often be successfully treated by taking daily hormone tablets to replace the hormones your thyroid isn't making. There's no way of preventing an underactive thyroid. Most cases are caused either by the immune system attacking the thyroid gland and damaging it, or by damage to the thyroid that occurs during some treatments for an overactive thyroid or thyroid cancer. Read more about the causes of an underactive thyroid. When to see your GP Symptoms of an underactive thyroid are often similar to those of other conditions, and they usually develop slowly, so you may not notice them for years. You should see your GP and ask to be tested for an underactive thyroid if you have symptoms including: tiredness weight gain depression  being sensitive to the cold dry skin and hair muscle aches The only accurate way of finding out whether you have a thyroid problem is to have a thyroid function test, where a sample of blood is tested to measure your hormone levels. Read more about testing for an underactive thyroid. Who's affected Both men and women can have an underactive thyroid, although it's more common in women. In the UK, it affects 15 in every 1,000 women and 1 in 1,000 men. Children can also develop an underactive thyroid. Around 1 in 3,500-4,000 babies are born with an underactive thyroid (congenital hypothyroidism). All babies born in the UK are screened for congenital hypothyroidism using a blood spot test when the baby is about five days old. Treating an underactive thyroid Treatment for an underactive thyroid involves taking daily hormone replacement tablets, called levothyroxine, to raise your thyroxine levels. You'll usually need treatment for the rest of your life. However, with proper treatment, you should be able to lead a normal, healthy life. If an underactive thyroid isn't treated, it can lead to complications, including heart disease, goitre, pregnancy problems and a life-threatening condition called myxoedema coma (although this is very rare). Read more about treating an underactive thyroid and the complications of an underactive thyroid. The thyroid gland The thyroid gland is a small butterfly-shaped gland in the neck, just in front of the windpipe (trachea). One of its main functions is to produce hormones that help regulate the body's metabolism (the process that turns food into energy). These hormones are called triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4). Many of the body's functions slow down when the thyroid doesn't produce enough of these hormones. Page last reviewed: 11\/05\/2015 Next review due: 11\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2272 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 582  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 150  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 337  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Goitre Thyroid cancer Overactive thyroid External links British Thyroid Foundation Thyromind Lab Tests Online: TSH Lab Tests Online UK: T4 test 10 medical reasons for feeling tired Any serious illness \u2013 and some minor ones \u2013 can make you tired. Here are 10 health conditions that can cause fatigue Tiredness and fatigue What makes you tired, plus how to boost your energy with an energy diet and other self-help tips Forum content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Undescended testicles","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/undescendedtesticles","content":"Undescended testicles - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Undescended testicles  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview undescendedtesticles Real stories undescendedtesticles Clinical trials Undescended testicles undescendedtesticles Treatment Introduction  Undescended testicles are a common childhood condition where a boy's testicles are not in their usual place in the scrotum. It's estimated that about one in every 25 boys are born with undescended testicles. In most cases, no treatment is necessary, as the testicles will usually move down into the scrotum naturally during the first three to six months of life. However, around one in 100 boys has testicles that stay undescended unless treated. The medical term for having one or two undescended testicles is unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism. When to see your GP Undescended testicles are usually detected during the newborn physical examination carried out soon after birth, or during a routine check-up at six to eight weeks. See your GP if at any point you notice that one or both of your child's testicles are not in the normal place within the scrotum. Undescended testicles aren't painful and your child isn't at risk of any immediate health problems, but they should be monitored by a doctor in case treatment is needed later on. What causes undescended testicles? During pregnancy, the testicles form inside a baby boy's abdomen (tummy), before slowly moving down into the scrotum about a month or two before birth. It's not known exactly why some boys are born with undescended testicles. Most boys with the condition are otherwise completely healthy. Being born prematurely (before the 37th week of pregnancy), having a low birth weight and having a family history of undescended testicles may increase the chances of a boy being born with undescended testicles. Diagnosing undescended testicles Undescended testicles can usually be diagnosed after a physical examination. This will determine whether the testicles can be felt near the scrotum (palpable) or if they can't be felt at all (impalpable). This physical examination can sometimes be difficult, so your doctor may need to refer your child to a paediatric surgeon. No further scans or tests are needed to locate the testicles if they can be felt by the doctor. If they cannot be felt, part of the initial surgical treatment (see below) may involve keyhole surgery (a diagnostic laparoscopy) to see if the testicles are inside the abdomen. How undescended testicles are treated If the testicles haven't descended by six months, they're very unlikely to do so and treatment will usually be recommended. This is because boys with untreated undescended testicles can have fertility problems in later life and an increased risk of developing testicular cancer. Treatment will usually involve an operation called an orchidopexy to move the testicle(s) into the correct position inside the scrotum. This is a relatively straightforward operation, with a good success rate. Surgery is ideally carried out before 12 months of age. If undescended testicles are treated at an early age, the risk of fertility problems and testicular cancer can be reduced. Read more about treating undescended testicles. Retractile testicles In most boys, the testicles can move in and out of the scrotum at different times, usually changing position as a result of temperature changes or feelings of fear or excitement. This is a separate condition known as retractile testicles. Retractile testicles in young boys aren't a cause for concern, as the affected testicles often settle permanently in the scrotum as they get older. However, they may need to be monitored during childhood, because they sometimes don't descend naturally and treatment may be required. See your GP if you notice that your child's testicles are not within the scrotum. Your GP can carry out an examination to determine whether your child's testicles are undescended or retractile. Page last reviewed: 10\/09\/2015 Next review due: 10\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 111 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Infertility Newborn physical examination Testicular cancer External links Great Ormond Street Hospital: undescended testicles Newborn physical examination All new parents are offered a physical examination for their newborn. Find out what's involved Baby health and development reviews Find out when your baby will have their health and development reviews, and what happens at each one NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Upper limb disorder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Repetitive-strain-injury","content":"Repetitive strain injury (RSI) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Repetitive strain injury (RSI)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Repetitive-strain-injury Clinical trials Repetitive strain injury Repetitive-strain-injury Diagnosis Repetitive-strain-injury Treatment Introduction  Repetitive strain injury (RSI) is a general term used to describe the pain felt in muscles, nerves and tendons caused by repetitive movement and overuse. It's also known as work-related upper limb disorder, or non-specific upper limb pain. The condition mostly affects parts of the upper body, such as the: forearms and elbows wrists and hands neck and shoulders Symptoms of RSI The symptoms of RSI can range from mild to severe and usually develop gradually. They often include: pain, aching or tenderness stiffness throbbing tingling or numbness weakness cramp At first, you might only notice symptoms when you're carrying out a particular repetitive action. But without treatment, the symptoms of RSI may eventually become constant and cause longer periods of pain. You may also get swelling in the affected area, which can last for several months. What to do if you think you have RSI If you develop symptoms of RSI and think it may be related to your job, speak to your employer or occupational health representative. It may be possible to modify your tasks to improve your symptoms.  See your GP if symptoms continue, despite attempts to change how you work. Read more about diagnosing RSI. What causes RSI? RSI is related to the overuse of muscles and tendons in the upper body. Certain things are thought to increase the risk of RSI, including: repetitive activities doing a high-intensity activity for a long time without rest poor posture or activities that require you to work in an awkward position Cold temperatures and vibrating equipment are also thought to increase the risk of getting RSI and can make the symptoms worse. Stress can also be a contributing factor. A variety of jobs can lead to RSI, such as working at an assembly line, at a supermarket checkout or typing at a computer. It's important to work in a comfortable environment which has been appropriately adjusted. Your employer has a legal duty to try to prevent work-related RSI and ensure anyone who already has the condition doesn't get any worse. Read more about workplace health. How RSI is treated The first step in treating RSI is usually to identify and modify the task or activity that is causing the symptoms. If necessary, you may need to stop doing the activity altogether. To relieve symptoms, your GP may advise taking a course of anti-inflammatory painkillers (such as aspirin or ibuprofen), or using a heat or cold pack, elastic support or splint. You may also be referred to a physiotherapist for advice on posture and how to strengthen or relax your muscles. Some people find that other types of therapy help to relieve symptoms, including massage, yoga and osteopathy. Read more about treating RSI. How to prevent RSI Most employers carry out a risk assessment when you join a company to check that your work area is suitable and comfortable for you. You can request an assessment if you haven't had one. There are also things you can do to help reduce your risk of RSI, such as: maintaining good posture at work \u2013 see how to sit at a desk correctly  taking regular breaks from long or repetitive tasks \u2013 it's better to take smaller, more frequent breaks than one long lunch break trying relaxation techniques if you're stressed If you work at a computer all day, make sure your seat, keyboard, mouse and screen are positioned so they cause the least amount of strain. See tips on preventing RSI for more detailed advice about using a mouse and keyboard at work. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1414 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 387  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 80  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 753  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Healthy back at work Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Trevor Shaw, principal ergonomist, explains how bad posture contributes to health problems including back pain. He describes how to improve your health at work. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Carpal tunnel syndrome Physiotherapy Tendonitis External links Health and Safety Executive Workplace health Improve your health at work, with tips on dealing with stress, RSI, back pain, exercise and healthy lunches Tips to prevent RSI Prevent repetitive strain injury (RSI), with tips on relaxation, checking your workstation, and adjusting your computer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urethritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/non_specific_urethritis","content":"Non-gonococcal urethritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-gonococcal urethritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Non_specific_urethritis Clinical trials Non-gonococcal urethritis Non_specific_urethritis Symptoms Non_specific_urethritis Causes Non_specific_urethritis Diagnosis Non_specific_urethritis Treatment Non_specific_urethritis Complications Non-gonococcal urethritis  Urethritis is inflammation of the urethra \u2013 the tube that carries urine from the bladder out of the body. It is usually caused by an infection. The term non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU) is used when the condition is not caused by gonorrhoea \u2013 a sexually transmitted infection (STI). NGU is sometimes referred to as non-specific urethritis (NSU) when no cause can be found. In women, NGU rarely has any symptoms. Symptoms in men include: a painful or burning sensation when urinating the tip of the penis feeling irritated and sore a white or cloudy discharge from the tip of the penis Read more about the symptoms of NGU. If you think you have NGU, you should visit your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic or sexual health clinic. These clinics have access to specialist diagnostic equipment that your GP may not have. It is easy to find sexual health services in your area. Sexual health services are free and available to everyone, regardless of age, sex, ethnic origin and sexual orientation. Why does NGU happen? NGU can have a number of possible causes, including irritation to the urethra and STIs. Chlamydia causes up to 43 out of 100 cases of NGU. There are many cases of NGU where no infection is found. If no cause is found, you will still be offered treatment for possible infection. This is also the case if inflammation is caused by an object such as a catheter in the urethra, or by using creams and soaps around the genitals. Read more about the causes of NGU. Who is affected? Urethritis is the most common condition diagnosed and treated among men in GUM clinics or sexual health clinics in the UK. There are around 80,000 men diagnosed with urethritis every year. It is more difficult to diagnose urethritis in women because it may not cause as many symptoms. NGU is usually diagnosed after urine and swab tests. Read more about diagnosing NGU. Treating NGU Antibiotics are usually prescribed to treat NGU. You may be given them before you get your test results. Antibiotics are also used in cases where NGU is thought to have been caused by an object, cream or soap. In most cases, only a short course of treatment is needed and symptoms clear up after about two weeks. The most common antibiotics used are azithromycin and doxycycline (Vibramycin-D). It is important that past and current sexual partners are also treated, to prevent any infection spreading to others. After treatment has been completed, and symptoms have disappeared, it should be safe to start having sex again. Read more about treating NGU. Preventing NGU As NGU is usually caused by an STI, practising safer sex is the best way to reduce the chances of it developing. Safer sex involves using barrier contraception, such as condoms, and having regular checks at sexual health clinics or GUMs. Read more about preventing NGU. Complications NGU can have some complications \u2013 for example, the condition can keep coming back. Other complications include: reactive arthritis \u2013 when the immune system starts attacking healthy tissue, which can lead to joint pain and conjunctivitis epididymo-orchitis \u2013 inflammation of the testicles Women often have no symptoms of NGU. However, if it's caused by chlamydia and left untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Repeated episodes of PID are associated with an increased risk of infertility. Read more about the complications of NGU.  Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 77 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Sexual health Chlamydia Gonorrhoea Sexually transmitted infections Why is my penis smelly and sore? Find sexual health services External links Avert: information about sex Brook: find a service FPA: non-specific urethritis Lab Tests Online UK: testing for a bacterial infection British Association for Sexual Health and HIV: guidelines Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urge incontinence","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Incontinence-urinary","content":"Urinary incontinence - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urinary incontinence  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Incontinence-urinary Real stories Incontinence-urinary Clinical trials Urinary incontinence Incontinence-urinary Symptoms Incontinence-urinary Causes Incontinence-urinary Diagnosis Incontinence-urinary Non-surgical treatment Incontinence-urinary Surgery and procedures Incontinence-urinary Prevention Introduction  Urinary incontinence is the unintentional passing of urine. It is a common problem and is thought to affect millions of people worldwide. It's not clear exactly how many people are affected, but it's estimated that between 3 and 6 million people in the UK may have some degree of urinary incontinence. Urinary incontinence affects both men and women, but it tends to be more common in women overall. Signs and symptoms The symptoms of urinary incontinence depend on the type you have. There are several types of urinary incontinence, but the most common are: stress incontinence \u2013 when urine leaks out at times when your bladder is under pressure, for example when you cough or laugh urge incontinence \u2013 when urine leaks as you feel a sudden, intense urge to pass urine, or soon afterwards It is also possible to have a mixture of both stress and urge urinary incontinence. Read more about the symptoms of urinary incontinence. What causes urinary incontinence? The causes of urinary incontinence depend on the type. Stress incontinence is usually the result of the weakening or damaging of the muscles used to prevent urination, such as the pelvic floor muscles and the urethral sphincter. Urge incontinence is usually the result of overactivity of the detrusor muscles, which control the bladder. Certain things can increase the chances of urinary incontinence developing, including: pregnancy and vaginal birth obesity a family history of incontinence increasing age \u2013 although incontinence is not an inevitable part of ageing Read more about the causes of urinary incontinence. Seeking medical advice Although you may feel embarrassed talking to someone about your symptoms, it's a good idea to see your GP if you have any type of urinary incontinence as this can be the first step towards finding a way to effectively manage the problem. Urinary incontinence can usually be diagnosed after a consultation with your GP, who will ask about your symptoms and may carry out a pelvic examination (in women) or rectal examination (in men). Your GP may also suggest you keep a diary in which you note how much fluid you drink and how often you have to urinate. Read more about diagnosing urinary incontinence. How urinary incontinence is treated Initially, your GP may suggest some simple measures to see if they help improve your symptoms. These may include: lifestyle changes, such as losing weight and cutting down on caffeine and alcohol pelvic floor exercises (exercising your pelvic floor muscles by squeezing them) taught by a specialist  bladder training (where you learn ways to help you can wait longer between needing to urinate and passing urine) guided by a specialist You may also benefit from the use of incontinence products, such as absorbent pads and hand-held urinals (urine collection bottles). If you are still unable to manage your symptoms, medication may be recommended.  Surgery may also be considered. The specific procedures suitable for you will depend on the type of incontinence you have. Surgical treatments for stress incontinence, such as tape or sling procedures, are used to reduce pressure on the bladder, or strengthen the muscles that control urination. Operations to treat urge incontinence include enlarging the bladder or implanting a device that stimulates the nerve that controls the detrusor muscles. Read more about non-surgical treatments for urinary incontinence and surgery and procedures for urinary incontinence. Preventing urinary incontinence It is not always possible to prevent urinary incontinence, but there are some steps you can take that may help reduce the chance of it developing, such as: controlling your weight avoiding or cutting down on alcohol keeping fit \u2013 in particular, ensuring that your pelvic floor muscles are strong Read more about preventing urinary incontinence. Urinary incontinence Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Stress, childbirth and age can all cause incontinence. Get expert advice on treatments, including pelvic floor exercises, medication and surgery. Media last reviewed: 07\/05\/2015 Next review due: 07\/05\/2017 How we pass urine Urine passes from the kidneys through tubes called ureters to the bladder, where it is stored. The bladder is supported by pelvic floor muscles. Some of this muscle wraps around the urethra \u2013 the tube that runs from the bladder to outside the body \u2013 to help keep it closed until you need to pass urine. Once the bladder is full, a signal is sent to the brain that you need to pass urine. When you are ready, the brain tells the pelvic floor muscles to relax and open the urethra. The muscles around the bladder contract and push the urine out. A problem in any part of this process can result in urinary incontinence. Page last reviewed: 06\/10\/2014 Next review due: 06\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 526 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 211  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with incontinence Pregnancy exercises Bowel incontinence Urinary catheterisation Can I get incontinence products on the NHS? What are pelvic floor exercises? External links Age UK: incontinence Education and Resources for Improving Childhood Continence (ERIC) MHRA: vaginal tapes for stress urinary incontinence NICE: urinary incontinence in women The taboo of incontinence Find out about the different types of incontinence and why they occur Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urinary catheterisation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Urinary-catheterization","content":"Urinary catheterisation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urinary catheterisation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Urinary-catheterization Clinical trials Urinary catheterisation Urinary-catheterization Types Urinary-catheterization Living with Urinary-catheterization Risks Introduction  Urinary catheterisation is a procedure used to drain the bladder and collect urine, through a flexible tube called a catheter. Urinary catheters are usually inserted by doctors or nurses in hospital or the community. They can either be inserted through the tube that carries urine out of the bladder (urethral catheter) or through a small opening made in your lower tummy (suprapubic catheter). The catheter usually remains in the bladder, allowing urine to flow through it and into a drainage bag. Depending on the type of catheter you have and why it\u2019s being used, the catheter may be removed after a few minutes, hours or days, or it may be needed for the long term. Why urinary catheters are used A urinary catheter is usually used in people who have difficulty passing urine naturally. It can also be used to empty the bladder before or after surgery and to help perform certain tests. Specific reasons include: to allow urine to drain if you have an obstruction in the tube that carries urine out of the bladder (urethra) \u2013 for example, because of scarring or prostate enlargement to allow you to urinate if you have bladder weakness or nerve damage which affects your ability to pee to drain your bladder during childbirth, if you have an epidural anaesthetic to drain your bladder before, during and\/or after some types of surgery, such as operations on the womb, ovaries or bowels to deliver medication directly into the bladder, such as during chemotherapy for bladder cancer as a treatment for urinary incontinence when other types of treatment haven\u2019t worked The catheter will be used until it\u2019s no longer needed. This may be for a short time and will be removed before leaving hospital, or it may be needed for longer or even permanently. Types of urinary catheter There are two main types of urinary catheter: intermittent catheters \u2013 catheters that are temporarily inserted into the bladder and removed once the bladder is empty indwelling catheters \u2013 catheters that remain in place for many days or weeks and are held in position by a water-filled balloon in the bladder Many people prefer to use an indwelling catheter because it's more convenient and avoids the repeated catheter insertions associated with intermittent catheters. However, indwelling catheters are more likely to cause problems such as infections (see below). Inserting either type of catheter can be uncomfortable, so anaesthetic gel is used to reduce any pain. You may also experience some discomfort while the catheter is in place, but most people with a long-term catheter get used to this over time. Read more about the types of urinary catheter. Looking after your catheter If you need a long-term urinary catheter, you will be given detailed advice about looking after it before you leave hospital. This will include advice about getting new catheter supplies, reducing the risk of complications such as infections, spotting signs of potential problems, and when you should seek further medical advice. You should be able to live a relatively normal life with a urinary catheter. The catheter and bag can be concealed under clothes and you should be able to carry out most everyday activities, including working, exercising, swimming and having sex. Read more about living with a urinary catheter. Risks and potential problems The main problem caused by urinary catheters are infections in the urethra, bladder, or less commonly the kidneys. These types of infection are known as urinary tract infections (UTIs) and they usually need to be treated with antibiotics. Catheters can also sometimes lead to other problems, such as bladder spasms (similar to stomach cramps), leakages, blockages and damage to the urethra. Read more about the risks of urinary catheterisation Page last reviewed: 19\/02\/2015 Next review due: 19\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 197 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Urinary incontinence Urinary tract infections External links Bladder and Bowel Foundation The British Association of Urological Surgeons: patient info healthtalk.org: living with a urinary catheter Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Check your bladder A lot can be done to help bladder problems. Take this test to see if you need further advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urinary incontinence","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Incontinence-urinary","content":"Urinary incontinence - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urinary incontinence  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Incontinence-urinary Real stories Incontinence-urinary Clinical trials Urinary incontinence Incontinence-urinary Symptoms Incontinence-urinary Causes Incontinence-urinary Diagnosis Incontinence-urinary Non-surgical treatment Incontinence-urinary Surgery and procedures Incontinence-urinary Prevention Introduction  Urinary incontinence is the unintentional passing of urine. It is a common problem and is thought to affect millions of people worldwide. It's not clear exactly how many people are affected, but it's estimated that between 3 and 6 million people in the UK may have some degree of urinary incontinence. Urinary incontinence affects both men and women, but it tends to be more common in women overall. Signs and symptoms The symptoms of urinary incontinence depend on the type you have. There are several types of urinary incontinence, but the most common are: stress incontinence \u2013 when urine leaks out at times when your bladder is under pressure, for example when you cough or laugh urge incontinence \u2013 when urine leaks as you feel a sudden, intense urge to pass urine, or soon afterwards It is also possible to have a mixture of both stress and urge urinary incontinence. Read more about the symptoms of urinary incontinence. What causes urinary incontinence? The causes of urinary incontinence depend on the type. Stress incontinence is usually the result of the weakening or damaging of the muscles used to prevent urination, such as the pelvic floor muscles and the urethral sphincter. Urge incontinence is usually the result of overactivity of the detrusor muscles, which control the bladder. Certain things can increase the chances of urinary incontinence developing, including: pregnancy and vaginal birth obesity a family history of incontinence increasing age \u2013 although incontinence is not an inevitable part of ageing Read more about the causes of urinary incontinence. Seeking medical advice Although you may feel embarrassed talking to someone about your symptoms, it's a good idea to see your GP if you have any type of urinary incontinence as this can be the first step towards finding a way to effectively manage the problem. Urinary incontinence can usually be diagnosed after a consultation with your GP, who will ask about your symptoms and may carry out a pelvic examination (in women) or rectal examination (in men). Your GP may also suggest you keep a diary in which you note how much fluid you drink and how often you have to urinate. Read more about diagnosing urinary incontinence. How urinary incontinence is treated Initially, your GP may suggest some simple measures to see if they help improve your symptoms. These may include: lifestyle changes, such as losing weight and cutting down on caffeine and alcohol pelvic floor exercises (exercising your pelvic floor muscles by squeezing them) taught by a specialist  bladder training (where you learn ways to help you can wait longer between needing to urinate and passing urine) guided by a specialist You may also benefit from the use of incontinence products, such as absorbent pads and hand-held urinals (urine collection bottles). If you are still unable to manage your symptoms, medication may be recommended.  Surgery may also be considered. The specific procedures suitable for you will depend on the type of incontinence you have. Surgical treatments for stress incontinence, such as tape or sling procedures, are used to reduce pressure on the bladder, or strengthen the muscles that control urination. Operations to treat urge incontinence include enlarging the bladder or implanting a device that stimulates the nerve that controls the detrusor muscles. Read more about non-surgical treatments for urinary incontinence and surgery and procedures for urinary incontinence. Preventing urinary incontinence It is not always possible to prevent urinary incontinence, but there are some steps you can take that may help reduce the chance of it developing, such as: controlling your weight avoiding or cutting down on alcohol keeping fit \u2013 in particular, ensuring that your pelvic floor muscles are strong Read more about preventing urinary incontinence. Urinary incontinence Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Stress, childbirth and age can all cause incontinence. Get expert advice on treatments, including pelvic floor exercises, medication and surgery. Media last reviewed: 07\/05\/2015 Next review due: 07\/05\/2017 How we pass urine Urine passes from the kidneys through tubes called ureters to the bladder, where it is stored. The bladder is supported by pelvic floor muscles. Some of this muscle wraps around the urethra \u2013 the tube that runs from the bladder to outside the body \u2013 to help keep it closed until you need to pass urine. Once the bladder is full, a signal is sent to the brain that you need to pass urine. When you are ready, the brain tells the pelvic floor muscles to relax and open the urethra. The muscles around the bladder contract and push the urine out. A problem in any part of this process can result in urinary incontinence. Page last reviewed: 06\/10\/2014 Next review due: 06\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 526 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 211  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with incontinence Pregnancy exercises Bowel incontinence Urinary catheterisation Can I get incontinence products on the NHS? What are pelvic floor exercises? External links Age UK: incontinence Education and Resources for Improving Childhood Continence (ERIC) MHRA: vaginal tapes for stress urinary incontinence NICE: urinary incontinence in women The taboo of incontinence Find out about the different types of incontinence and why they occur Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urinary PSA test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-prostate","content":"Prostate cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Prostate cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-prostate Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-prostate Community Prostate cancer Cancer-of-the-prostate Symptoms Cancer-of-the-prostate Causes Cancer-of-the-prostate Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-prostate PSA testing Cancer-of-the-prostate Treatment Cancer-of-the-prostate Living with Introduction  Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the UK, with over 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. Prostate cancer usually develops slowly, so there may be no signs you have it for many years. Symptoms often only become apparent when your prostate is large enough to affect the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the penis). When this happens, you may notice things like an increased need to urinate, straining while urinating and a feeling that your bladder has not fully emptied. These symptoms shouldn\u2019t be ignored, but they do not mean you definitely have prostate cancer. It is more likely that they are caused by something else, such as benign prostatic hyperplasia (also known as BPH or prostate enlargement). Read more about the symptoms of prostate cancer. What is the prostate? The prostate is a small gland in the pelvis found only in men. About the size of a satsuma, it's located between the penis and the bladder and surrounds the urethra. The main function of the prostate is to help in the production of semen. It produces a thick white fluid that is mixed with the sperm produced by the testicles, to create semen. Why does prostate cancer happen? The causes of prostate cancer are largely unknown. However, certain things can increase your risk of developing the condition. The chances of developing prostate cancer increase as you get older. Most cases develop in men aged 50 or older. For reasons not yet understood, prostate cancer is more common in men of African-Caribbean or African descent, and less common in men of Asian descent. Men who have first degree male relatives (such as a father or brother) affected by prostate cancer are also at slightly increased risk. Read more about the causes of prostate cancer. Tests for prostate cancer There is no single test for prostate cancer. All the tests used to help diagnose the condition have benefits and risks, which your doctor should discuss with you. The most commonly used tests for prostate cancer are blood tests, a physical examination of your prostate (known as a digital rectal examination or DRE) and a biopsy. The blood test, known as a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test, measures the level of PSA and may help detect early prostate cancer. Men are not routinely offered PSA tests to screen for prostate cancer, as results can be unreliable. This is because the PSA blood test is not specific to prostate cancer. PSA can be raised due to a large non-cancerous growth of the prostate (BPH), a urinary tract infection or inflammation of the prostate, as well as prostate cancer. Raised PSA levels also cannot tell a doctor whether a man has life-threatening prostate cancer or not. This means a raised PSA can lead to unnecessary tests and treatment. However, you can ask to be tested for prostate cancer once the benefits and risks have been explained to you. Read more about diagnosing prostate cancer and PSA screening for prostate cancer. How is prostate cancer treated? For many men with prostate cancer, treatment is not immediately necessary. If the cancer is at an early stage and not causing symptoms, a policy of \"watchful waiting\" or \"active surveillance\" may be adopted. This involves carefully monitoring your condition. Some cases of prostate cancer can be cured if treated in the early stages. Treatments include surgically removing the prostate, radiotherapy and hormone therapy. Some cases are only diagnosed at a later stage when the cancer has spread. If the cancer spreads to other parts of the body, typically the bones, it cannot be cured and treatment is focused on prolonging life and relieving symptoms. All treatment options carry the risk of significant side effects, including erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence. For this reason, many men choose to delay treatment until there is a risk the cancer might spread. Newer treatments, such as high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) or cryotherapy, aim to reduce these side effects. Some hospitals may offer them as an alternative to surgery, radiotherapy or hormone therapy. However, the long-term effectiveness of these treatments are not yet known. Read more about treating prostate cancer. Living with prostate cancer As prostate cancer usually progresses very slowly, you can live for decades without symptoms or needing treatment. Nevertheless, it can have an effect on your life. As well as causing physical problems such as erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence, a diagnosis of prostate cancer can understandably make you feel anxious or depressed. You may find it beneficial to talk about the condition with your family, friends, a family doctor and other men with prostate cancer. Financial support is also available if prostate cancer reduces your ability to work. Read more about living with prostate cancer. Page last reviewed: 03\/01\/2015 Next review due: 03\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 908 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 362  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 288  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer community Care and support End of life issues for carers Prostate enlargement Prostate health Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: prostate cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Lab Tests Online UK: PSA test Localised Prostate Cancer Decision Aid Malecare My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Prostate Risk Management Scheme Prostate Cancer UK Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) Testing Decision Aid Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Prostate cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urinary tract infection","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Urinary-tract-infection-adults","content":"Urinary tract infections (UTIs) in adults - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urinary tract infections in adults  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Urinary-tract-infection-adults Clinical trials Urinary tract infections in adults   Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are common infections that can affect the bladder, the kidneys and the tubes connected to them. Anyone can get them, but they're particularly common in women. Some women experience them regularly (called recurrent UTIs). UTIs can be painful and uncomfortable, but usually pass within a few days and can be easily treated with antibiotics. This page is about UTIs in adults. There is a separate article about UTIs in children. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Treatment Causes Prevention Symptoms of UTIs Infections of the bladder (cystitis) or urethra (tube that carries urine out of the body) are known as lower UTIs. These can cause: a need to pee more often than usual pain or discomfort when peeing sudden urges to pee feeling as though you're unable to empty your bladder fully pain low down in your tummy urine that's cloudy, foul-smelling or contains blood feeling generally unwell, achy and tired Infections of the kidneys or ureters (tubes connecting the kidneys to the bladder) are known as upper UTIs. These can cause the above symptoms and also: a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4ºF) or above pain in your sides or back shivering and chills feeling and being sick confusion agitation or restlessness Lower UTIs are common and aren't usually a cause for major concern. Upper UTIs can be serious if left untreated, as they could damage the kidneys or spread to the bloodstream. When to get medical advice It's a good idea to see your GP if you think you might have a UTI, particularly if: you have symptoms of an upper UTI (see above) the symptoms are severe or getting worse the symptoms haven't started to improve after a few days you get UTIs frequently Your GP can rule out other possible causes of your symptoms by testing a sample of your urine and can prescribe antibiotics if you do have an infection. Antibiotics are usually recommended because untreated UTIs can potentially cause serious problems if they're allowed to spread. Treatment for UTIs UTIs are normally treated with a short course of antibiotics. Most women are given a three-day course of antibiotic capsules or tablets. Men, pregnant women and people with more serious symptoms may need a slightly longer course. Your symptoms will normally pass within three to five days of starting treatment. But make sure you complete the whole course of antibiotics that you've been prescribed, even if you're feeling better. Over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol can help with any pain. Drinking plenty of fluids may also help you feel better. Return to your GP if your symptoms don't improve, get worse or come back after treatment. Causes of UTIs UTIs occur when the urinary tract becomes infected, usually by bacteria. In most cases, bacteria from the gut enter the urinary tract through the urethra. This may occur when wiping your bottom or having sex, for example, but often it's not clear why it happens. The following may increase your risk of getting a UTI: conditions that obstruct your urinary tract, such as kidney stones difficulty emptying your bladder fully using a contraceptive diaphragm or condoms coated in spermicide diabetes a weak immune system \u2013 from chemotherapy or HIV, for example  a urinary catheter (a tube in your bladder used to drain urine) an enlarged prostate gland in men Women may be more likely to get UTIs because their urethra is shorter than a man's and is closer to their anus (back passage). Preventing UTIs If you get UTIs frequently, there are some things you can try that may stop it coming back. However, it's not clear how effective most of these measures are. These measures include: avoiding perfumed bubble bath, soap or talcum powder around your genitals \u2013 use plain, unperfumed varieties, and have a shower rather than a bath going to the toilet as soon as you need to pee and always emptying your bladder fully staying well hydrated  wiping your bottom from front to back when you go to the toilet emptying your bladder as soon as possible after having sex not using a contraceptive diaphragm or condoms with spermicidal lubricant on them \u2013 you may wish to use another method of contraception instead wearing underwear made from cotton, rather than synthetic material such as nylon, and avoiding tight jeans and trousers Speak to your GP if these measures don't work. They may suggest taking a long-term course of antibiotics or they may give you a prescription for antibiotics you can use as soon as you experience symptoms of a UTI. There's currently little evidence to suggest that drinking cranberry juice or using probiotics significantly reduces your chances of getting UTIs. Page last reviewed: 21\/06\/2016 Next review due: 21\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2149 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1030  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 613  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 134  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 275  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cystitis Kidney infection UTIs in children Women's health 18-39 External links Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms Decision Aid British Association of Urological Surgeons: urinary infections NICE: UTIs in adults Check your bladder A lot can be done to help bladder problems. Take this test to see if you need further advice Keeping your kidneys healthy Five simple lifestyle tips to keep your kidneys healthy and functioning well NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cystitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cystitis","content":"Cystitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cystitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cystitis Clinical trials Cystitis Cystitis Symptoms Cystitis Causes Cystitis Treatment Introduction  Cystitis is inflammation of the bladder, usually caused by a bladder infection. It's a common type of urinary tract infection (UTI), particularly in women, and is usually more of a nuisance than a cause for serious concern. Mild cases will often get better by themselves within a few days. However, some people experience episodes of cystitis frequently and may need regular or long-term treatment. There's also a chance that cystitis could lead to a more serious kidney infection in some cases, so it's important to seek medical advice if your symptoms don't improve. Signs and symptoms of cystitis The main symptoms of cystitis include: pain, burning or stinging when you pee needing to pee more often and urgently than normal urine that's dark, cloudy or strong smelling pain low down in your tummy feeling generally unwell, achy, sick and tired Possible symptoms in young children include a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above, weakness, irritability, reduced appetite and vomiting. Read more about the symptoms of cystitis. When to see your GP Women don't necessarily need to see their GP if they have cystitis, as mild cases often get better without treatment. You can try the self-help measures listed below, or ask your pharmacist for advice. See your GP if: you're not sure whether you have cystitis your symptoms don't start to improve within a few days you get cystitis frequently you have severe symptoms, such as blood in your urine, a fever or pain in your side you're pregnant and have symptoms of cystitis you're a man and have symptoms of cystitis your child has symptoms of cystitis Your GP should be able to diagnose cystitis by asking about your symptoms. They may test a sample of your urine for bacteria to help confirm the diagnosis. What causes cystitis? Most cases are thought to occur when bacteria that live harmlessly in the bowel or on the skin get into the bladder through the urethra (tube that carries urine out of your body). It's not always clear how this happens, but it can be caused by: having sex wiping your bottom after going to the toilet \u2013 particularly if you wipe from back to front inserting a tampon or urinary catheter (a thin tube inserted into the urethra to drain the bladder) using a diaphragm for contraception Women may get cystitis more often than men because their anus (back passage) is closer to their urethra, and their urethra is much shorter, which means bacteria may be able to get into the bladder more easily. Read more about the causes of cystitis. Treatments for cystitis If you see your GP with cystitis, you'll usually be prescribed antibiotics to treat the infection. These should start to have an effect within a day or two. If you've had cystitis before and don't feel you need to see your GP, you may want to treat your symptoms at home. Until you're feeling better, it may help to: take paracetamol or ibuprofen drink plenty of water hold a hot water bottle on your tummy or between your thighs avoid having sex Some people find it helpful to try over-the-counter products that reduce the acidity of their urine (such as sodium bicarbonate or potassium citrate), but there's a lack of evidence to suggest they're effective. If you keep getting cystitis, your GP may give you an antibiotic prescription to take to a pharmacy whenever you develop symptoms, without needing to see your doctor first. Your GP can also prescribe a low dose of antibiotics for you to take continuously over several months. Read more about treating cystitis. Preventing cystitis If you get cystitis frequently, there are some things you can try that may stop it coming back. However, it's not clear how effective most of these measures are. These measures include: not using perfumed bubble bath, soap or talcum powder around your genitals \u2013 use plain, unperfumed varieties having a shower, rather than a bath \u2013 this avoids exposing your genitals to the chemicals in your cleaning products for too long going to the toilet as soon as you need to pee and always emptying your bladder fully staying well hydrated \u2013 drinking plenty of fluids may help to stop bacteria multiplying in your bladder  always wiping your bottom from front to back when you go to the toilet emptying your bladder as soon as possible after having sex not using a diaphragm for contraception \u2013 you may wish to use another method of contraception instead wearing underwear made from cotton, rather than synthetic material such as nylon, and not wearing tight jeans and trousers Drinking cranberry juice has traditionally been recommended as a way of reducing your chances of getting cystitis. However, large studies have suggested it doesn't make a significant difference. Interstitial cystitis If you have long-term or frequent pelvic pain and problems peeing, you may have a condition called interstitial cystitis. This is a poorly understood bladder condition that mostly affects middle-aged women. Unlike regular cystitis, there's no obvious infection in the bladder and antibiotics don't help. However, your doctor may be able to recommend a number of other treatments to reduce your symptoms. Read more about interstitial cystitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/08\/2015 Next review due: 14\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1208 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 616  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 341  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Interstitial cystitis Kidney infection Urinary tract infection in adults Urinary tract infection in children External links COB Foundation: cystitis Check your bladder A lot can be done to help bladder problems. Take this test to see if you need further advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Kidney infection","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Kidney-infection","content":"Kidney infection - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Kidney infection  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Kidney-infection Clinical trials Kidney infection Kidney-infection Symptoms Kidney-infection Causes Kidney-infection Diagnosis Kidney-infection Treatment Kidney-infection Complications Kidney-infection Prevention Introduction  A kidney infection (pyelonephritis) is a painful and unpleasant illness caused by bacteria travelling from your bladder into one or both of your kidneys. It's more serious than cystitis, a common infection of the bladder that makes urinating painful. If treated promptly, a kidney infection doesn't cause serious harm, but will make you feel very unwell. If a kidney infection isn't treated, it can get worse and cause permanent kidney damage. Symptoms of a kidney infection often come on within a few hours. You can feel feverish, shivery, sick and have a pain in your back or side. Read more about the symptoms of a kidney infection. When to see your GP See your GP if you have a fever and persistent tummy, lower back or genital pain, or if you notice a change to your usual pattern of urination. Most kidney infections need prompt treatment with antibiotics to stop the infection from damaging the kidneys or spreading to the bloodstream. You may also need painkillers. If you're especially vulnerable to the effects of an infection \u2013 for example, if you have a pre-existing health condition or are pregnant, you may be admitted to hospital and treated with antibiotics through an intravenous drip. After taking antibiotics, you should feel completely better after about two weeks. In rare cases, a kidney infection can cause further problems. These include blood poisoning (sepsis) and a build-up of pus in the kidney called an abscess. Read more about treating a kidney infection and the complications of a kidney infection. What causes a kidney infection? A kidney infection usually happens when bacteria \u2013 often a type called E. coli \u2013 gets into the urethra (the tube which carries urine out of the body) and travels up through the bladder and into the kidneys. Read more about the causes of a kidney infection. Who's at risk? Kidney infections are relatively rare. It's estimated that one in every 830 people develops a kidney infection each year in the UK. They can happen at any age, but are much more common in women. In fact, women are six times more likely to get a kidney infection than men. This is because a woman's urethra is shorter, making it easier for bacteria to reach the kidneys. Younger women are most at risk because they tend to be more sexually active, and having frequent sex increases the chances of getting a kidney infection. Younger children are also vulnerable to developing kidney infections because they may be born with an abnormality of the urinary tract or have a condition called vesico-ureteric reflux, where there is a backflow of urine from the bladder up to the kidneys. Can kidney infections be prevented? You can reduce your chances of developing a kidney infection by keeping your bladder and urethra free from bacteria. This can include drinking plenty of fluids, keeping your genitals clean and treating any constipation. Read more about preventing a kidney infection. Page last reviewed: 19\/12\/2014 Next review due: 19\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 913 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 451  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 226  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 108  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cystitis Kidney health Kidney stones Urinary infections in adults Urinary infections in children External links NICE: urinary tract infection in children Are your kidneys healthy? Take this short assessment to find out if you need to have your kidney function checked Keeping your kidneys healthy Five simple lifestyle tips to keep your kidneys healthy and functioning well Kidney health Find out about how to look after your kidneys and whether you need to have them checked Find and choose services for Kidney infection Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urinary tract infection, children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Urinary-tract-infection-children","content":"Urinary tract infections in children - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urinary tract infections in children  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Urinary-tract-infection-children Clinical trials Urinary tract infections in children Urinary-tract-infection-children Diagnosis Urinary-tract-infection-children Treatment   Urinary tract infections (UTIs) in children are fairly common, but not usually serious. They can be effectively treated with antibiotics. A UTI may be classed as either: an upper UTI \u2013 if it's a kidney infection or an infection of the ureters, the tubes connecting the kidneys to the bladder a lower UTI \u2013 if it's a bladder infection (cystitis) or an infection of the urethra, the tube that carries urine from the bladder out of the body When to seek medical advice If you think your child is unwell and could have a UTI, contact your GP as soon as possible. Although UTIs aren't normally a serious type of infection, they should be diagnosed and treated quickly to reduce the risk of complications. This topic covers: Symptoms Diagnosis Causes Treatment Prevention Recurrent UTIs in children Symptoms of a UTI in children It can be difficult to tell whether your child has a UTI, as the symptoms can be vague and young children can't easily communicate how they feel. General signs that may suggest your child is unwell include: a high temperature (fever) vomiting tiredness and lack of energy (lethargy) irritability poor feeding not gaining weight properly in very young children, yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) More specific signs that your child may have a UTI include: pain or a burning sensation when peeing needing to pee frequently deliberately holding in their pee a change in their normal toilet habits, such as wetting themselves or wetting the bed pain in their tummy (abdomen), side or lower back unpleasant-smelling pee blood in their pee cloudy pee Diagnosing UTIs in children In most cases, your GP can diagnose a UTI by asking about your child's symptoms, examining them, and arranging for a sample of their pee to be tested. Treatment usually begins soon after a urine sample has been taken, and your child won't need any further tests. In a few circumstances, further tests may be needed in hospital to check for abnormalities. Your GP may refer you straight to hospital if your child is very young. Read more about diagnosing UTIs in children. Causes of UTIs in children Most UTIs in children are caused by bacteria from the digestive system entering the urethra. There are many ways this can happen, including: when a child wipes their bottom and soiled toilet paper comes into contact with their genitals \u2013 this is more of a problem for girls than boys because girls' bottoms are much nearer the urethra babies getting small particles of poo in their urethra when they soil their nappies \u2013 particularly if they squirm a lot when being changed There's often no obvious reason why some children develop UTIs and others don't.  However, some children may be more vulnerable to UTIs because of a problem with emptying their bladder, such as: constipation \u2013 this can sometimes cause part of the large intestine to swell, which can put pressure on the bladder and prevent it emptying normally dysfunctional elimination syndrome \u2013 a relatively common childhood condition where a child \"holds on\" to their pee, even though they have the urge to pee vesicoureteral reflux \u2013 an uncommon condition where urine leaks back up from the bladder into the ureters and kidneys; this occurs as a result of a problem with the valves in the ureters where they enter the bladder Treating UTIs in children Most childhood UTIs clear up within 24 to 48 hours of treatment with antibiotics and won't cause any long-term problems. In many cases, treatment involves your child taking a course of antibiotic tablets at home. As a precaution, babies under three months old and children with more severe symptoms are usually admitted to hospital for a few days to receive antibiotics directly into a vein (intravenous antibiotics). Read more about treating UTIs in children. Preventing UTIs in children It isn't possible to prevent all childhood UTIs, but there are some things you can do to reduce the risk of your child getting one. The following advice may help: if possible, exclusively breastfeed your baby for the first six months after they're born \u2013 this can help improve your baby's immune system and reduce their risk of constipation encourage girls to wipe their bottom from front to back \u2013 this helps to minimise the chances of bacteria entering the urethra make sure your child is well hydrated and goes to the toilet regularly \u2013 not urinating regularly and \"holding in\" urine can make it easier for bacteria to infect the urinary tract avoid nylon and other types of synthetic underwear \u2013 these can help promote the growth of bacteria; loose-fitting cotton underwear should be worn instead avoid using scented soaps or bubble baths \u2013 these can increase your child's risk of developing a UTI take steps to reduce your child's risk of constipation \u2013 make sure they drink enough to keep their urine pale and clear during the day, and speak to your GP about medications that can help if constipation is a persistent problem Some people feel that drinking cranberry juice or taking cranberry supplements can help reduce their risk of UTIs. However, recent high-quality research into these claims found little evidence to suggest cranberries have a significant impact on your chances of developing a UTI. Recurrent UTIs in children A small number of children have recurring UTIs. If your child's had a UTI before, it's important that both of you watch for the return of any associated symptoms. Tell your GP about any symptoms as soon as possible so a diagnosis can be confirmed and treatment can begin. If your child has a problem that increases their risk of UTIs, such as faulty valves that allow urine to flow the wrong way, they may be prescribed low-dose antibiotics as a long-term measure to prevent further infections. Page last reviewed: 23\/05\/2016 Next review due: 23\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 306 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 163  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Does your child have a serious illness? Kidney health Looking after a sick child Treating a high temperature in children Urinary tract infections (UTIs) in adults External links ERIC: the children's continence charity National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): urinary tract infections (UTIs) in children Looking after a sick child How to look after a sick child, including dealing with minor accidents and getting help Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Microalbumin-test","content":"Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Microalbumin test Introduction  Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR), also known as urine microalbumin, helps identify kidney disease that can occur as a complication of diabetes. If kidney disease is diagnosed early in people with diabetes, appropriate treatment can be given and its effects can be closely monitored. Therefore, a person's ACR level should be checked as soon as diabetes is diagnosed. It should also be measured each year, or more frequently, if your ACR level is significantly raised. If you have a slightly raised ACR level you may have early-stage kidney disease. A very high ACR level indicates more severe kidney disease. A very low ACR value probably means your kidneys are functioning normally. If diabetes is well managed, it's easier to control or prevent complications developing, such as high blood pressure, which can sometimes lead to kidney disease. Read more about treating type 1 diabetes and treating type 2 diabetes. Read more about ACR at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 76 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Chronic kidney disease Diabetes External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urine microalbumin","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Microalbumin-test","content":"Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Microalbumin test Introduction  Urine albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR), also known as urine microalbumin, helps identify kidney disease that can occur as a complication of diabetes. If kidney disease is diagnosed early in people with diabetes, appropriate treatment can be given and its effects can be closely monitored. Therefore, a person's ACR level should be checked as soon as diabetes is diagnosed. It should also be measured each year, or more frequently, if your ACR level is significantly raised. If you have a slightly raised ACR level you may have early-stage kidney disease. A very high ACR level indicates more severe kidney disease. A very low ACR value probably means your kidneys are functioning normally. If diabetes is well managed, it's easier to control or prevent complications developing, such as high blood pressure, which can sometimes lead to kidney disease. Read more about treating type 1 diabetes and treating type 2 diabetes. Read more about ACR at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 76 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Chronic kidney disease Diabetes External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urine, blood in the","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/blood-in-urine","content":"Blood in urine (haematuria) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blood in urine (haematuria)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Blood in urine (haematuria) Introduction  Finding blood in your urine can be very frightening and must be investigated by a doctor, but it's not usually a sign of anything life-threatening. If you notice bright red blood in your urine, or if your urine has turned red or brown because it has blood in it, see your GP. Sometimes, urine may contain only a small amount of blood invisible to the naked eye and is only apparent when a urine test is carried out for something else. This still needs to be investigated by your doctor, as healthy urine should not contain any detectable amounts of blood. The medical name for blood in the urine is haematuria. If blood in the urine is obvious with the naked eye, it is called \"macroscopic\", or \"visible haematuria\". If the blood can only be detected with laboratory testing, it is called \"microscopic\", or \"non-visible\". The blood will have come from somewhere within the urinary tract \u2013 the kidneys, bladder or the tubes that urine passes through. It is often the result of a urinary tract infection (UTI), such as cystitis. This page outlines the most common reasons for blood in the urine, to give you an idea of what may be causing the problem. However, this guide should not be used to self-diagnose your condition, and it's important to see your GP for a proper diagnosis. Is there definitely blood in your urine? Before you read on, it's worth considering whether you have recently eaten beetroot, as this can colour the urine pink and cause unnecessary alarm. Some medicines, such as the antibiotics nitrofurantoin and rifampicin, can also turn your urine red or brown. Check that the blood is actually coming from your urine and not your vagina (if you're a woman) or back passage. Common causes of blood in urine These include: a bladder infection (such as cystitis) \u2013 which typically also causes a burning pain when you urinate a kidney infection \u2013 which may also cause a high temperature and pain in the side of your tummy kidney stones \u2013 which may be painless, but can sometimes block one of the tubes coming from your kidneys and cause severe tummy pain urethritis \u2013 inflammation of the tube that carries urine out of the body (urethra); it's often caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI) such as chlamydia an enlarged prostate gland \u2013 this is a common condition in older men and nothing to do with prostate cancer; an enlarged prostate gland will press on the bladder and may also cause problems such as difficulty urinating and a frequent need to urinate bladder cancer \u2013 this usually affects adults aged over 50 and can also cause you to urinate more often and more urgently, as well as pain when urinating kidney cancer \u2013 this also usually affects adults aged over 50, and can cause persistent pain below your ribs and a lump in your tummy prostate cancer \u2013 this is usually only seen in men aged over 50 and usually progresses very slowly; other symptoms can include needing to urinate more frequently and urgently, and difficulty emptying your bladder You can read more about these conditions by clicking on the above links. Seeing your GP Your GP will ask about your symptoms and carry out a physical examination to help determine the cause of the blood in your urine. For men, this may include a rectal examination and women may have a vaginal examination. They will also arrange blood\/and or urine tests to look for signs of an infection. If they think that an infection is likely, they may prescribe some antibiotics before you get your results and will refer you to a specialist if your test results later show you don't have an infection. In some cases, your GP may recommend keeping an eye on your symptoms to see if they get better on their own over time. Referral to a specialist Your GP should refer you urgently to a specialist if any of the following apply: you have visible blood in your urine and no pain, and tests show there is no infection you are 40 or over and keep getting UTIs and blood in your urine you are 50 or over and a urine test picks up unexplained non-visible blood in your urine you have a lump in your tummy (a possible tumour) that was picked up during physical examination by your doctor or during a scan non-visible haematuria is picked up during a test, particularly if there is also protein found in the urine You will be referred to a hospital urology or nephrology department, or a specialist haematuria clinic, for further tests to identify the cause of your symptoms. These tests may include more blood and urine tests, an ultrasound scan, an X-ray and a cystoscopy. This is a procedure used to examine the inside of the bladder, using an instrument called a cystoscope. Page last reviewed: 07\/01\/2015 Next review due: 07\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2637 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1362  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 732  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 133  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 316  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Call your GP today If you notice blood in your pee, even if it\u2019s \u2018just the once\u2019, tell your doctor. Call your GP today Useful links NHS Choices links Blood in semen Urinary tract infections (UTIs) How should I collect and store a urine sample? External links InfoKID: haematuria Kidney Research UK: blood in the urine Lab Tests Online UK: urine test Keeping your kidneys healthy Five simple lifestyle tips to keep your kidneys healthy and functioning well Blood in semen Find out about the common causes of blood in your semen Kidney problems What can go wrong with your kidneys and why, including kidney disease, kidney stones and kidney cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urine, smelly","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/smelly-urine","content":"Smelly urine - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Smelly urine  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Smelly urine Introduction  Healthy urine should be clear and straw-coloured, and shouldn't be particularly smelly. Some people find that their urine smells stronger and is darker first thing in the morning when it's more concentrated, or generally when they're dehydrated. Also, certain food and drinks, including asparagus, beer, garlic and coffee, may temporarily give urine a stronger smell. Certain medicines and vitamin and mineral supplements can also alter the odour of urine \u2013 but never stop taking any medication without speaking to your GP first. You may find the smell of your urine improves by drinking more fluids. Generally, make sure you drink enough fluid so you're not thirsty for long periods, and steadily increase your fluid intake when exercising and during hot weather. Do I ever need to see my GP? It's not necessary to see your GP about smelly urine unless you're concerned \u2013 for example, if you have other symptoms too. See your GP if: You have symptoms of a urinary tract infection (UTI), such as pain or a burning sensation when urinating and a need to urinate often. This is the most likely cause of unexplained foul-smelling urine. A UTI will often get better on its own, especially if you increase your fluid intake. It is less likely to get better without treatment in men than in women. You have diabetes and feel you're not managing it properly \u2013 urine can smell abnormally sweet in uncontrolled diabetes. Could it indicate any other medical condition? The following conditions can sometimes cause smelly urine, but they are uncommon:  urinary stones \u2013 these may cause an ammonia-like odour (read about bladder stones and kidney stones) a bladder fistula \u2013 this is an abnormal connection between your intestines and bladder maple syrup urine disease \u2013 this rare genetic disease means you have difficulty breaking down certain amino acids liver failure (read about the different types of liver disease that can lead to liver failure) diabetic ketoacidosis \u2013 this dangerous complication of diabetes happens when the body is unable to use blood glucose because there isn't enough insulin, so it breaks down fat as an alternative source of fuel, causing a build-up of a by-product called ketones  Page last reviewed: 16\/10\/2014 Next review due: 16\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 424 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 165  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 134  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Urinary tract infections in adults Kidney health Cystitis External links Cystitis and Overactive Bladder Foundation Blood in your urine Finding blood in your urine can be scary and must be investigated by a doctor, but it's not usually a sign of anything life threatening NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Urticaria","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Nettle-rash","content":"Urticaria (hives) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urticaria (hives)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Nettle-rash Clinical trials Urticaria (hives) Nettle-rash Causes Nettle-rash Diagnosis Nettle-rash Treatment Introduction  Urticaria \u2013 also known as hives, weals, welts or nettle rash \u2013 is a raised, itchy rash that appears on the skin. It may appear on one part of the body or be spread across large areas.  The rash is usually very itchy and ranges in size from a few millimetres to the size of a hand. Although the affected area may change in appearance within 24 hours, the rash usually settles within a few days. Doctors may refer to urticaria as either: acute urticaria \u2013 if the rash clears completely within six weeks chronic urticaria \u2013 in rarer cases, where the rash persists or comes and goes for more than six weeks, often over many years A much rarer type of urticaria, known as urticaria vasculitis, can cause blood vessels inside the skin to become inflamed. In these cases, the weals last longer than 24 hours, are more painful, and can leave a bruise. When to seek medical advice Visit your GP if your symptoms don't go away within 48 hours. You should also contact your GP if your symptoms are: severe causing distress disrupting daily activities occurring alongside other symptoms Who's affected by urticaria? Acute urticaria (also known as short-term urticaria) is a common condition, estimated to affect around one in five people at some point in their lives. Children are often affected by the condition, as well as women aged 30 to 60, and people with a history of allergies. Chronic urticaria (also known as long-term urticaria) is much less common, affecting up to five in every 1,000 people in England. What causes urticaria? Urticaria occurs when a trigger causes high levels of histamine and other chemical messengers to be released in the skin. These substances cause the blood vessels in the affected area of skin to open up (often resulting in redness or pinkness) and become leaky. This extra fluid in the tissues causes swelling and itchiness. Histamine is released for many reasons, including: an allergic reaction \u2013 such as a food allergy or a reaction to an insect bite or sting cold or heat exposure  infection \u2013 such as a cold certain medications \u2013 such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or antibiotics However, in many cases of urticaria, no obvious cause can be found. Some cases of long-term urticaria may be caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking healthy tissue. However, this is difficult to diagnose and the treatment options are the same. Certain triggers may also make the symptoms worse. These include: drinking alcohol or caffeine emotional stress warm temperature Read more about the causes of urticaria. Diagnosing urticaria Your GP will usually be able to diagnose urticaria by examining the rash. They may also ask you questions to find out what triggered your symptoms. If your GP thinks that it's caused by an allergic reaction, you may be referred to an allergy clinic for an allergy test. However, if you've had urticaria most days for more than six weeks, it's unlikely to be the result of an allergy. You may also be referred for a number of tests, including a full blood count (FBC), to find out whether there's an underlying cause of your symptoms. Read more about diagnosing urticaria. Treating urticaria In many cases, treatment isn't needed for urticaria, because the rash often gets better within a few days. If the itchiness is causing you discomfort, antihistamines can help. Antihistamines are available over the counter at pharmacies \u2013 speak to your pharmacist for advice. A short course of steroid tablets (oral corticosteroids) may occasionally be needed for more severe cases of urticaria. If you have persistent urticaria, you may be referred to a skin specialist (dermatologist). Treatment usually involves medication to relieve the symptoms, while identifying and avoiding potential triggers. Read about treating urticaria. Complications of urticaria Around a quarter of people with acute urticaria and half of people with chronic urticaria also develop angioedema, which is a deeper swelling of tissues. Chronic urticaria can also be upsetting and negatively impact a person's mood and quality of life. Angioedema Angioedema is swelling in the deeper layers of a person's skin. It's often severe and is caused by a build-up of fluid. The symptoms of angioedema can affect any part of the body, but usually affect the: eyes lips genitals hands feet Medication such as antihistamines and short courses of oral corticosteroids (tablets) can be used to relieve the swelling. Read more about treating angioedema. Emotional impact Living with any long-term condition can be difficult. Chronic urticaria can have a considerable negative impact on a person's mood and quality of life. Living with itchy skin can be particularly upsetting. One study found that chronic urticaria can have the same negative impact as heart disease. It also found that one in seven people with chronic urticaria had some sort of psychological or emotional problem, such as:  stress anxiety depression See your GP if your urticaria is getting you down. Effective treatments are available to improve your symptoms. Talking to friends and family can also improve feelings of isolation and help you cope better with your condition. Read about how talking to others can help. Anaphylaxis Urticaria can be one of the first symptoms of a severe allergic reaction known as anaphylaxis. Other symptoms of anaphylaxis include: swollen eyes, lips, hands and feet feeling lightheaded or faint narrowing of the airways, which can cause wheezing and breathing difficulties abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting  collapsing and becoming unconsciousness Anaphylaxis should always be treated as a medical emergency. Call 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance if you or someone else is experiencing anaphylaxis. Tell the operator about your (or their) symptoms. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/02\/2016 Next review due: 28\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 719 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 378  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 201  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaphylaxis Angioedema Antihistamines Corticosteroids Itching Long-term condition assessment External links Allergy UK: urticaria and angioedema British Association of Dermatologists: urticaria and angioedema Common skin conditions Facts about some of the most common skin problems, including causes and available treatments Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes Allergies Advice on allergies such as eczema and food allergy, and what treatments are available on the NHS NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Uterine (uterus) cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-uterus","content":"Womb (uterus) cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Womb (uterus) cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-uterus Community Womb (uterus) cancer Cancer-of-the-uterus Symptoms Cancer-of-the-uterus Causes Cancer-of-the-uterus Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-uterus Treatment Cancer-of-the-uterus Living with Introduction  Cancer of the womb (uterus) is a common cancer that affects the female reproductive system. It's also called uterine cancer and endometrial cancer. Abnormal vaginal bleeding is the most common symptom of womb cancer. If you have been through the menopause, any vaginal bleeding is considered abnormal. If you have not yet been through the menopause, unusual bleeding may include bleeding between your periods. You should see your GP as soon as possible if you experience any unusual vaginal bleeding. While it's unlikely to be caused by womb cancer, it's best to be sure. Your GP will examine you and ask about your symptoms. They will refer you to a specialist for further tests if they suspect you may have a serious problem, or if they are unsure about a diagnosis. Read more about the symptoms of womb cancer and diagnosing womb cancer. Types of womb cancer The vast majority of womb cancers begin in the cells that make up the lining of the womb (called the endometrium), which is why cancer of the womb is often called endometrial cancer. In rare cases, womb cancer can start in the muscles surrounding the womb. This type of cancer is called uterine sarcoma and may be treated in a different way from endometrial cancer. This article uses the term womb cancer, and mostly includes information about endometrial cancer. Read more information about soft tissue sarcomas. Womb cancer is separate from other cancers of the female reproductive system, such as ovarian cancer and cervical cancer. Why does womb cancer happen? It's not clear exactly what causes womb cancer, but certain things can increase your risk of developing the condition. A hormone imbalance is one of the most important risks for womb cancer. Specifically, your risk is increased if you have high levels of a hormone called oestrogen in your body. A number of things can cause this hormone imbalance, including obesity, diabetes, and hormone replacement therapy (HRT). There is also a small increase in the risk of womb cancer with long-term use of the breast cancer drug tamoxifen. It's not always possible to prevent womb cancer, but some things are thought to reduce your risk. This includes maintaining a healthy weight and the long-term use of some types of contraception. Read more about the causes of womb cancer and preventing womb cancer. How is womb cancer treated? The most common treatment for womb cancer is the surgical removal of the womb (hysterectomy). A hysterectomy can cure womb cancer in its early stages, but you will no longer be able to get pregnant. Surgery for womb cancer is also likely to include the removal of the ovaries and fallopian tubes. Radiotherapy or chemotherapy are also sometimes used, often in conjunction with surgery. A type of hormone therapy may be used if you are yet to go through the menopause and would still like to have children. Even if your cancer is advanced and the chances of a cure are small, treatment can still help to relieve symptoms and prolong your life. Read more about treating womb cancer. Living with womb cancer Living with cancer is challenging and womb cancer can affect your life in specific ways. For example, your sex life may be affected if you have a hysterectomy. You may find it physically more difficult to have sex and have a reduced sex drive. You may find it beneficial to talk to other people about your condition, including family members, your partner, or other people with womb cancer. Read more about living with womb cancer. Who is affected? Womb cancer is the most commonly occurring cancer of the female reproductive system. It's the fourth most common cancer diagnosed in women after breast cancer, lung cancer, and cancer of the colon and rectum. In the UK, about 8,475 new cases of womb cancer are diagnosed each year. Womb cancer is more common in women who have been through the menopause, and most cases are diagnosed in women aged 40 to 74. Womb cancer accounts for about 3% of all cancers diagnosed in women. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Page last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 243 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bleeding or spotting after the menopause Cancer support services Care and support Cervical cancer Hysterectomy Ovarian cancer Women's health 40-60 Women's health over-60s External links Cancer Research UK: womb cancer The Eve Appeal: womb cancer Macmillan: cancer of the womb My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Find and choose services for Uterine (uterus) cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Uterine prolapse","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prolapse-of-the-uterus","content":"Pelvic organ prolapse - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic organ prolapse  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prolapse-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Pelvic organ prolapse Prolapse-of-the-uterus Treatment Introduction  Pelvic organ prolapse is bulging of one or more of the pelvic organs into the vagina. These organs are the uterus, vagina, bowel and bladder. Symptoms may include: a sensation of a bulge or something coming down or out of the vagina, which sometimes needs to be pushed back discomfort during sex problems passing urine \u2013 such as slow stream, a feeling of not emptying the bladder fully, needing to urinate more often and leaking a small amount of urine when you cough, sneeze or exercise (stress incontinence) Some women with a pelvic organ prolapse don't have any symptoms and the condition is only discovered during an internal examination for another reason, such as a cervical screening. When to see your GP Pelvic organ prolapse isn't life-threatening, but it can affect your quality of life. See your GP if you have any of the symptoms of a prolapse, or if you notice a lump in or around your vagina. Internal pelvic examination Your doctor will need to carry out an internal pelvic examination. They'll ask you to undress from the waist down and lie back on the examination bed, while they feel for any lumps in your pelvic area. Some women may put off going to their GP if they're embarrassed or worried about what the doctor may find. However, the examination is important, only takes a few minutes and is similar to having a smear test. Further tests If you have bladder symptoms, such as needing to rush to the toilet or leaking when you cough and sneeze, further tests may need to be carried out in hospital. For example, a small tube (catheter) may be inserted into your bladder to examine your bladder function and identify any leakage problems. This test is known as urodynamics. Your doctor will decide if further tests are needed before treating the prolapse. Types of prolapse If pelvic organ prolapse is confirmed, it will usually be staged to indicate how severe it is. Most often, a number system is used, ranging from one to four, with four indicating a severe prolapse. Pelvic organ prolapse can affect the front, top or back of the vagina. The main types of prolapse are: anterior prolapse (cystocele) \u2013 where the bladder bulges into the front wall of the vagina prolapse of the uterus and cervix or top of the vagina \u2013 which can be the result of previous treatment to remove the womb (hysterectomy) posterior wall prolapse (rectocoele or enterocoele) \u2013 when the bowel bulges forward into the back wall of the vagina It's possible to have more than one of these types of prolapse at the same time. Why does prolapse happen? Prolapse is caused by weakening of tissues that support the pelvic organs. Although there's rarely a single cause, the risk of developing pelvic organ prolapse can be increased by: your age \u2013 prolapse is more common as you get older childbirth, particularly if you had a long or difficult labour, or gave birth to multiple babies or a large baby \u2013 up to half of all women who have had children are affected by some degree of prolapse changes caused by the menopause \u2013 such as weakening of tissue and low levels of the hormone oestrogen being overweight, obese or having large fibroids (non-cancerous tumours in or around the womb) or pelvic cysts \u2013 which creates extra pressure in the pelvic area previous pelvic surgery \u2013 such as a hysterectomy or bladder repair repeated heavy lifting and manual work long-term coughing or sneezing \u2013 for example, if you smoke, have a lung condition or allergy excessive straining when going to the toilet because of long-term constipation Certain conditions can also cause the tissues in your body to become weak, making a prolapse more likely, including: joint hypermobility syndrome \u2013 where your joints are very loose Marfan syndrome \u2013 an inherited condition that affects the blood vessels, eyes and skeleton Ehlers-Danlos syndrome \u2013 a group of inherited conditions that affect collagen proteins in the body Can a prolapse be prevented? There are several things you can do to reduce your risk of prolapse, including: doing regular pelvic floor exercises maintaining a healthy weight or losing weight if you're overweight eating a high-fibre diet with plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and wholegrain bread and cereal to avoid constipation and straining when going to the toilet avoiding heavy lifting If you smoke, stopping smoking may also help to reduce your risk of a prolapse. How is prolapse treated? Many women with prolapse don't need treatment, as the problem doesn't seriously interfere with their normal activities. Lifestyle changes such as weight loss and pelvic floor exercises are usually recommended in mild cases. If the symptoms require treatment, a prolapse may be treated effectively using a device inserted into the vagina, called a vaginal pessary. This helps to hold the prolapsed organ in place. Surgery may also be an option for some women. This usually involves giving support to the prolapsed organ. In some cases, complete removal of the womb (hysterectomy) is required, especially if the womb has prolapsed out. Most women experience a better quality of life after surgery, but there's a risk of problems remaining or even getting worse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/02\/2015 Next review due: 05\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1570 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 633  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 471  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 170  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 215  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Hysterectomy Urinary incontinence Women's health 40-60 External links MHRA: safety of vaginal meshes for pelvic organ prolapse NICE: infracoccygeal sacropexy using mesh NICE: insertion of mesh uterine suspension sling NHS leaflet: what is a sacrospinous fixation? (PDF, 65Kb) NICE: sacrocolpopexy with hysterectomy using mesh Women's Health Concern: prolapse Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Your body after childbirth Having a baby changes your body. Here's how it may change and some exercises and techniques to help. Find and choose services for Prolapse of the uterus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Uveitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Uveitis","content":"Uveitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Uveitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Uveitis Clinical trials Uveitis Uveitis Causes Uveitis Treatment Uveitis Complications Introduction  Uveitis is inflammation (swelling) of the middle layer of the eye, called the uvea or uveal tract. The uvea is made up of the iris (the coloured part of the eye), the ciliary body (the ring of muscle behind the iris), and the choroid (the layer of tissue that supports the retina). Symptoms of uveitis include: a painful red eye \u2013 the pain can range from mild aching to intense discomfort, and focusing your eye can make the pain worse; the eye can feel tender or bruised blurred or cloudy vision \u2013 this may come after other symptoms sensitivity to light (photophobia) marked or new floaters \u2013 shadows, webs, dots or veils that move across the field of vision loss of peripheral vision (the ability to see objects at the side of your field of vision) a pupil shaped differently or that doesn't get smaller when reacting to light headaches One or both eyes may be affected by uveitis. The symptoms can develop suddenly or gradually over a few days. People with long-term uveitis tend to have more visual symptoms and their eyes may look normal. Patients with sudden onset uveitis usually have more pain and tenderness. When to seek medical advice Contact your GP as soon as possible if you have persistent eye pain or you notice an unusual change in your vision, particularly if you've had previous episodes of uveitis. The sooner uveitis is treated, the more successful treatment is likely to be. Your GP may refer you to an ophthalmologist, who is a specialist in eye conditions. An ophthalmologist will examine your eye in more detail with a microscope and light (a slit-lamp), and may suggest further tests if uveitis is diagnosed. This may include scans of your eyes, X-rays and blood tests. Knowing the cause of your uveitis will help determine the treatment needed. Why does uveitis happen? There are a wide range of potential causes for uveitis, although a specific cause is not always identified. Many cases are thought to be the result of a problem with the immune system (the body's defence against illness and infection). For unknown reasons, the immune system can become overactive in the eye. Less commonly, uveitis can be caused by an infection or injury to the eye, and it can also happen after eye surgery. Read more about the causes of uveitis. Types of uveitis There are different types of uveitis, depending on which part of the eye is affected: anterior uveitis \u2013 inflammation of the iris (iritis) or inflammation of the iris and the ciliary body (iridocyclitis); this is the most common type of uveitis, accounting for about three out of four cases, tends to come on quickly, and can be recurrent, causing pain and redness intermediate uveitis \u2013 inflammation of the area behind the ciliary body and the vitreous jelly; this can cause floaters and blurred vision posterior uveitis \u2013 inflammation at the back of the eye, the choroid and the retina; this can cause problems with vision In some cases, uveitis can affect the front and back of the eye. This is known as panuveitis. How is uveitis treated? The main treatment of uveitis is steroid medication (corticosteroids), which can reduce inflammation inside the eye. The type of steroid medication used depends on the type of uveitis you have. Eye drops are often used for uveitis affecting the front of the eye, whereas injections, tablets and capsules are more often used to treat uveitis affecting the middle and back of the eye. In some cases, additional treatment may be needed. This might be eye drops to relieve pain, a type of medicine called an immunosuppressant, and even surgery. Uveitis caused by infection needs specific treatment. Read more about treating uveitis. How long can it last? Uveitis can be: acute \u2013 when it resolves quickly after treatment recurrent \u2013 when repeated episodes are separated by gaps of several months chronic \u2013 when the condition continues long-term or requires long-term medication to control it Complications Although most cases of uveitis respond quickly to treatment and cause no further problems, there is a risk of complications. The risk is higher in people who have intermediate or posterior uveitis, or have repeated episodes of uveitis. Complications of uveitis include permanent damage of the eye and some loss of vision. It's estimated that the more serious types of uveitis are responsible for 1 in every 10 cases of visual impairment in the UK. Read more about the possible complications of uveitis. Who is affected? Uveitis is uncommon. It's estimated that 2 to 5 in every 10,000 people will be affected by uveitis in the UK every year. It usually affects people aged 20 to 59, but can also occur in children. Men and women are affected equally. It's more likely to occur in people with other inflammatory or immune conditions. Despite being uncommon, uveitis is a leading cause of visual impairment in the UK. This is why it's very important to diagnose and treat the condition as early as possible. Information about you If you have uveitis, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2015 Next review due: 27\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 226 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Eye health Floaters Glaucoma Retinal detachment External links Eyecare Trust: uveitis GOV.UK: driving with a disability or health condition International Uveitis Study Group RNIB: uveitis Uveitis Information Group Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery Find and choose services for Uveitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}