{"conditions":[{"name":"Taenia saginata and taenia solium","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tapeworm-infections","content":"Tapeworm infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tapeworm infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tapeworm-infections Clinical trials Tapeworm infections Tapeworm-infections Symptoms Tapeworm-infections Causes Tapeworm-infections Diagnosis Tapeworm-infections Treatment Tapeworm-infections Complications Tapeworm-infections Prevention Introduction  Tapeworms are parasites that can live in a person's intestine (bowel). They don't always cause symptoms and when they do they are often mistaken for another illness. Tapeworm infections are most commonly seen in developing countries and are rare in the UK. Tapeworms are known medically as cestodes. They are usually flat and ribbon-like and made up of segments. Some adult worms grow to 4.5-9m (15-30 feet) in length. Humans can catch them by: touching contaminated faeces (stools) and then placing their hands near their mouth swallowing food or water containing traces of contaminated faeces eating raw contaminated pork, beef or fish Read more about the causes of a tapeworm infection. How do I know if I have a tapeworm? You may not know you have a tapeworm infection until you see segments of the worm in your stools (poo). The segments will look like white grains of rice but sometimes longer sections of the worm may need to be seen by an expert to confirm diagnosis. A tapeworm infection does not always cause symptoms. Or if there are symptoms \u2013 typically stomach pain and sometimes vomiting and diarrhoea \u2013 they are often mistaken for another illness. Read more information about the symptoms of a tapeworm infection. See your GP if you see what you think are segments of a tapeworm in your stools. Infection is usually diagnosed from a stool sample but further tests may be needed depending on the type of tapeworm infection. Read more about how tapeworm infections are diagnosed. Treating tapeworm infections If you're diagnosed with a tapeworm infection you'll need treatment to get rid of it. The beef tapeworm lives only in your intestine and is easily treated with tablets. But other tapeworms can lead to serious complications and those that develop as larvae in your body are more difficult to treat. Read more information about treating tapeworm infections and complications of a tapeworm infection. Avoiding tapeworm infections It is important to prepare food properly to avoid a tapeworm infection. Raw meat and fish in particular must be cooked and stored correctly. Vegetables and fruit should be washed thoroughly before they are eaten. Your personal hygiene is even more important if you are in close contact with animals, or travelling in a country where tapeworm infections are more common. Read more information about preventing tapeworm infections. Humans can get a tapeworm infection by eating raw contaminated meat or fish  How to prepare and cook food safely How to prepare and cook food correctly to reduce the risk of food poisoning, including E. coli Page last reviewed: 04\/09\/2014 Next review due: 04\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 306 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 172  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food safety Food hygiene Infections from animals to people Travel health External links Food Standards Agency Food safety How to prevent food poisoning at home, including E. coli, with advice on food safety and keeping germs in check NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Takayasu arteritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vasculitis\/Pages\/Introduction.aspx#Takayasu","content":"Vasculitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vasculitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vasculitis Introduction  Vasculitis literally means 'inflammation of the blood vessels'. Inflammation is your immune system's response to tissue that has become injured or infected. Damaged cells release chemicals that cause blood vessels to leak fluid into the tissues, causing tissue swelling. If there's an infection, this helps isolate the invading germ.  In vasculitis, your immune system attacks the blood vessels by mistake. The trigger may be an infection, a medicine or another medical condition. Sometimes, however, the cause isn't clear. It leads to swollen blood vessel walls and narrowed blood vessels. Blood flow to tissues and organs is reduced or blocked. If the blood vessel wall becomes weak, bleeding can occur. Any blood vessel can become inflamed like this, from large arteries (\"arteritis\") to small blood vessels, in any place in the body. The larger the blood vessels affected, the more damage there may be. All these variables mean there are many possible types of vasculitis, each with different symptoms and potential complications. These are covered below (ordered by size of the affected blood vessels): Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis) Polymyalgia rheumatica  Takayasu arteritis  Polyarteritis nodosa  Kawasaki disease Granulomatosis with polyangiitis  Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis  Microscopic polyangiitis Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura  Less common types  These types of vasculitis are briefly explained below, with links taking you to more detailed information. Giant cell arteritis Giant cell arteritis is an age-related condition in which medium and large arteries, usually in the head and neck, become inflamed. It's sometimes called \"temporal arteritis\", because the arteries around the temples are often affected. Symptoms of giant cell arteritis include: aching and soreness around the temples jaw muscle pain while eating vision loss It tends to only affect adults over the age of 50, and the cause is unclear. The main treatment is steroid medication (usually prednisolone), which is given promptly when the diagnosis is suspected.  Read more about giant cell arteritis. Polymyalgia rheumatica  Polymyalgia rheumatica is another age-related condition closely related to giant cell arteritis. It causes pain, stiffness and inflammation in the muscles around the shoulders, neck and hips. It may also cause more general symptoms, such as a fever, extreme tiredness, loss of appetite, weight loss and depression. The condition is two to three times more common in women than men, and most people diagnosed with it are over 70 years old. The cause is unclear.  The main treatment is usually prednisolone (a steroid medication), which is usually used in lower doses than for giant cell arteritis.  Read more about polymyalgia rheumatica. Takayasu arteritis Takayasu arteritis is rare in the UK. The main artery from the heart is affected, along with the major arteries branching off this. These arteries gradually narrow over time, which reduces the blood supply to the limbs and other parts of the body. Treatment is usually steroid medication. Read information about Takayasu arteritis from Vasculitis UK. Polyarteritis nodosa Polyarteritis nodosa is a rare form of vasculitis, in which the medium or smaller arteries become damaged and inflamed. It particularly affects the arteries supplying the gut, kidneys and nerves. Sometimes, only part of the artery wall is affected, which becomes weak and may bulge, forming an aneurysm. If this leaks or ruptures, it can cause serious internal bleeding. Polyarteritis nodosa can also affect the whole wall of the artery at a particular point, and cause a blockage. The condition is potentially very serious. Typical symptoms are feeling unwell with fever, skin rashes, tummy aches, nerve damage and weight loss. Polyarteritis nodosa can sometimes be triggered by an infection, but the exact cause is uncertain. Read information about polyarteritis nodosa from the Great Ormond Street Hospital website. Kawasaki disease Kawasaki disease is a rare condition that affects small and medium arteries in children under the age of five.  The characteristic symptoms of Kawasaki disease are a high temperature that lasts for more than five days, with a rash, swollen glands in the neck, red fingers or toes, red eyes and redness of the lips, tongue or mouth. Kawasaki disease can affect the coronary arteries (the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart), so some children with Kawasaki disease experience heart complications. The trigger is thought to be an infection, although the exact cause is not fully understood. The affected child will usually need to be managed in hospital, because of the risk of complications \u2013 they will need to be carefully assessed for heart problems and treated with immunoglobulins and aspirin. Read more about Kawasaki disease. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener\u2019s granulomatosis)  Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is an uncommon disorder that mainly affects the blood vessels in the nose, sinuses, ears, lungs and kidneys. It can cause a wide range of symptoms, including fever, night sweats, sinusitis, nosebleeds and crusting of the nose, shortness of breath, coughing up blood and kidney impairment. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a serious condition that can be fatal if left untreated, because it can lead to tissue damage and organ failure. High doses of drugs are needed to dampen down the immune system and bring the inflammation under control. Typically, it is treated with steroid medications (prednisone) and cyclophosphamide \u2013 a cancer drug that suppresses the immune system. Read more about granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg\u2013Strauss syndrome) Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a type of vasculitis that typically causes allergic sinusitis and asthma to develop in adults. It mainly affects adults aged 30-45. Many of the other symptoms are general and include fever, muscle and joint aches, tiredness, loss of appetite and weight loss. The condition can also affect the nerves, causing weakness, pins and needles or numbness, and it sometimes damages the heart muscle. Read information about Eosinophilic granulomatosis from Vasculitis UK. Microscopic polyangiitis Microscopic polyangiitis is another rare and potentially serious long-term vasculitis. Inflammation of the blood vessel walls may affect any organ, but particularly the lungs, kidneys and nervous system. It can lead to raised blood pressure, kidney impairment, anaemia, breathlessness and coughing up blood.  Read information from the Oxford University Hospitals NHS website about microscopic polyangiitis. Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura (HSP) Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) is a rare condition, usually seen in children, which results in a skin rash and joint and tummy pain. It can follow a recent infection. Inflammation of the blood vessels can cause the small surface blood vessels to bleed into the skin, which results in a characteristic rash (purpura). Joint pain is also common. HSP can also affect blood vessels in the bowel and the kidneys, and can cause tummy pain and visible blood in the urine or stools. HSP usually gets better without treatment and is not usually serious. Read more about Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Less common types of vasculitis  Behçet's disease \u2013 typically results in mouth ulcers and genital ulcers, and is more common in people from Greece, Turkey, the Middle East, China and Japan Buerger's disease (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 affects vessels in the legs and arms, leading to reduced blood flow to the hands and feet Primary angiitis of the central nervous system (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 inflammation of the brain's blood vessels Cogan's Syndrome (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 inflammation of the inner ears and eyes Cryoglobulin-associated vasculitis (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 associated with cryoglobulins (proteins in the blood that stick together in the cold); can cause a rash on the lower limbs, joint pain or arthritis, nerve damage, abdominal pain and kidney failure Hypersensitivity vasculitis (links to Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 most commonly caused by sensitivity to a drug such as penicillin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or the contraceptive pill, and results in a skin rash  Vasculitis caused by rheumatoid arthritis (links to the National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society) The links take you to more information on these rarer types of vasculitis. Arm of a 56-year-old woman with small vessel vasculitis (inflammation of the capillaries)  Why you should avoid smoking Smoking makes the blood vessels become even narrower than they already are, and can therefore make vasculitis symptoms worse. Get help now to stop smoking. Page last reviewed: 23\/09\/2014 Next review due: 23\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 69 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Giant cell arteritis Polymyalgia rheumatica Kawasaki disease Granulomatosis with polyangiitis Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura External links Vasculitis UK Corticosteroids Corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medicines prescribed to treat a wide range of health conditions NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Takotsubo cardiomyopathy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cardiomyopathy","content":"Cardiomyopathy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Cardiomyopathy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Cardiomyopathy is a general term for diseases of the heart muscle, where the walls of the heart chambers have become stretched, thickened or stiff. This affects the heart's ability to pump blood around the body. Some types of cardiomyopathy are inherited and are seen in children and younger people. This page explains the main types of cardiomyopathy: dilated cardiomyopathy hypertrophic cardiomyopathy restrictive cardiomyopathy arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy takotsubo cardiomyopathy or 'broken heart syndrome' It then explains:  diagnosing cardiomyopathy treating cardiomyopathy information about you Dilated cardiomyopathy In dilated cardiomyopathy the muscle walls of the heart have become stretched and thin, so they can't contract (squeeze) properly to pump blood around the body. How serious is it? If you have dilated cardiomyopathy, you're at greater risk of heart failure, where the heart fails to pump enough blood around the body at the right pressure. Heart failure typically causes shortness of breath, extreme tiredness and ankle swelling. Learn more about the symptoms of heart failure. There's also a risk of heart valve problems, an irregular heartbeat and blood clots. You'll need to have regular appointments with your GP so the disease can be monitored. Who's affected? Dilated cardiomyopathy can affect both children and adults.  The heart muscle can become stretched if you have an unhealthy lifestyle or an underlying medical condition, or both. The following can all play a role in the disease: uncontrolled high blood pressure an unhealthy lifestyle \u2013 such as a lack of vitamins and minerals in the diet, heavy drinking and recreational drug use a viral infection that causes inflammation of the heart muscle   a heart valve problem a disease of the body tissues or vessels \u2013 such as Wegener's granulomatosis, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, lupus, polyarteritis nodosa, vasculitis or muscular dystrophy inheriting a mutated (changed) gene that makes you more vulnerable to the disease pregnancy \u2013 cardiomyopathy can sometimes develop as a complication of pregnancy But for many people, the cause is unknown. More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on living with dilated cardiomyopathy. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the heart muscle cells have enlarged and the walls of the heart chambers thicken. The chambers are reduced in size so they can't hold much blood, and the walls can't relax properly and may stiffen. How serious is it? Most people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy will be able to live a full, normal life. Some people don't even have symptoms and don't need treatment. But that doesn't mean the condition can't be serious. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common cause of sudden unexpected death in childhood and in young athletes. The main heart chambers can become stiff, leading to back pressure on the smaller collecting chambers. This can sometimes worsen the symptoms of heart failure and lead to abnormal heart rhythms (atrial fibrillation). Blood flow from the heart may become reduced or restricted (known as obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). Also, the mitral heart valve can become leaky, causing blood to leak backwards. Read more about mitral regurgitation. These heart changes can cause dizziness, chest pain, shortness of breath and temporary loss of consciousness. You'll also be at greater risk of developing endocarditis (a heart infection). If you have severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, you'll need to see your doctor regularly so your condition can be monitored. Your doctor will advise about the level and amount of exercise you can do and sensible lifestyle changes to make.  Who's affected? Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is thought to affect 1 in 500 people in the UK. Most people inherit the disease from their parents. Read more about how genetic conditions are inherited.   More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on living with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Restrictive cardiomyopathy Restrictive cardiomyopathy is rare and mostly affects older adults. The walls of the main heart chambers become stiffened and rigid and can't relax properly after contracting. This means the heart can't fill up properly with blood. It results in reduced blood flow from the heart and can lead to symptoms of heart failure, such as breathlessness, tiredness and ankle swelling, as well as heart rhythm problems. In many cases the cause is unknown, although sometimes it can be inherited. More information Read the American Heart Association's leaflet on restrictive cardiomyopathy (PDF, 102kb). Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy In arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), the proteins that normally hold the heart muscle cells together are abnormal. Muscle cells can die and the dead muscle tissue is replaced with fatty and fibrous tissue. The walls of the main heart chambers become thin and stretched, and can't pump blood around the body properly. People with ARVC typically have heart rhythm problems. Reduced blood flow from the heart can also lead to symptoms of heart failure. ARVC is an uncommon inherited condition caused by a mutation (change) in one or more genes. It can affect teenagers or young adults and has been the reason for some sudden unexplained deaths in young athletes. There's increasing evidence that prolonged, strenuous exercise worsens the symptoms of ARVC. It's important that people with or at risk of ARVC have a careful discussion about this with their cardiologist. More information Read the British Heart Foundation's detailed booklet on ARVC. Diagnosing cardiomyopathy Some cases of cardiomyopathy can be diagnosed after various heart scans and tests, such as an electrocardiogram (ECG) and an echocardiogram. Cardiomyopathy that runs in the family can be diagnosed after a genetic test. If you've been diagnosed with cardiomyopathy, you may be advised to have a genetic test to identify the mutation (faulty gene) that caused this. Your relatives can then be tested for the same mutation and, if they have it, their condition can be monitored and managed early. Treating cardiomyopathy  There's no cure for cardiomyopathy, but the treatments described below are usually effective at controlling symptoms and preventing complications. Not everyone with cardiomyopathy will need treatment. Some people only have a mild form of the disease that they can control after making a few lifestyle changes. Lifestyle changes If the cause of your cardiomyopathy isn't genetic, it should generally help to: follow a healthy diet and take gentle exercise quit smoking (if you smoke) lose weight (if you're overweight) avoid or reduce your intake of alcohol  get plenty of sleep manage stress make sure any underlying condition, such as diabetes, is well controlled  Medication Medication may be needed to control blood pressure, correct an abnormal heart rhythm, remove excess fluid or prevent blood clots.  Read about: medication for high blood pressure beta-blockers to treat an irregular heartbeat or heart failure diuretics to remove excess fluid from your body if this has caused swelling anticoagulants such as warfarin to prevent blood clots medication to treat heart failure Hospital procedures In some people with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the septum (the wall dividing the left and right side of the heart) is thickened and bulges into the main heart chamber. They may need to have either: an injection of alcohol into their heart \u2013 this is to reduce part of the muscle in the septum a septal myectomy \u2013 heart surgery to remove part of the thickened septum (the mitral valve may be repaired at the same time, if necessary) Those with heart rhythm problems may need to have a pacemaker, or a similar device, implanted to control their abnormal heart rhythm. Read more about having a pacemaker fitted. As a last resort, a heart transplant may be necessary. Information about you If you have cardiomyopathy, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. GOV.UK has more information about the register. Broken heart syndrome Some people who sustain significant emotional or physical stress, such as bereavement or major surgery, go on to experience a temporary heart problem. The heart muscle becomes suddenly weakened or \"stunned\", causing the left ventricle (one of the heart's main chambers) to change shape. It may be caused by a surge of hormones, particularly adrenaline, during this period of stress. The main symptoms are chest pain and breathlessness, similar to those of a heart attack \u2013 always call 999 if you or someone else experiences these. The condition \u2013 known medically as Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, or acute stress cardiomyopathy \u2013 is temporary and reversible. It's unusual for it to happen again. Source: British Heart Foundation Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/06\/2016 Next review due: 23\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 82 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Congenital heart disease Endocarditis Heart failure Valve replacement External links British Heart Foundation: cardiomyopathy The Cardiomyopathy Association Arrhythmias Find out what you need to know about arrhythmias or heart rhythm problems Is your blood pressure too high? At least 25% of adults have high blood pressure. Get tips on how to keep healthy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Talipes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Talipes","content":"Club foot - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Club foot  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Talipes Clinical trials Club foot Talipes Treatment Introduction  Club foot is a deformity of the foot and ankle that babies can be born with. The position and function of the foot can be greatly improved, if treated early. The foot of a baby with club foot points down and inwards, with the soles of the feet facing backwards. Club foot isn\u2019t painful for babies, but it can become painful as they get older and cause difficulties walking if it isn\u2019t treated. Club foot is relatively common, affecting around one baby in every 1,000 born in the UK. Both feet are affected in around half of the children born with the condition. The medical name for club foot is congenital talipes equinovarus. What causes club foot? In most cases the cause of club foot is unknown, although there may be a genetic link because it can run in families. If you have one child with club foot, your risk of having a second child with the condition is around one in 35. If one parent had the condition as a baby, there is around a one in 30 chance of their children having the condition. If both parents previously had the condition, this increases to around a one in three chance. In a small number of cases, club foot occurs as part of a more serious underlying condition affecting the baby's development, such as spina bifida. Diagnosing club foot Club foot is usually diagnosed after a baby is born, although the problem may first be spotted during the routine ultrasound scan carried out between 18 and 21 weeks of pregnancy. It cannot be treated before birth, but picking up the problem during pregnancy means you can talk to doctors about the condition in detail and find out what to expect after your baby is born. Further tests may also be carried out while you're pregnant, to check for conditions such as spina bifida. How club foot is treated Treatment for club foot should ideally start within a week or two of the baby being born, but it can still be effective if started later in childhood. A technique known as the Ponseti method is the main treatment for club foot nowadays. This involves your baby's foot being gently manipulated into a better position and then being put in a cast. This is repeated weekly for around five to eight weeks. After this stage, it's likely that your baby will need a minor procedure (carried out using a local anaesthetic) to make a small cut in their Achilles tendon. This can help to release their foot into a more natural position. Your baby will need to wear special boots attached to each other with a bar, to prevent club foot returning. These are only worn full-time for the first three months, then overnight until your child is four or five years old. Read more about treating club foot. Outlook The vast majority of children treated with the Ponseti method will have pain-free, normal-looking feet that function well. Most children are able to learn to walk by the usual age and can participate in activities such as sports when they're older. Some children may be left with a slightly shorter leg and smaller foot on one side if only one of their feet was affected. This won't usually cause any significant problems, but it may mean that your child will be slightly less mobile and may get tired quicker than other children. Before the Ponseti method was widely adopted, club foot was often treated with surgery to alter the position of the foot. This wasn't always effective and lead to long-term pain and stiffness for some adults. Information about your child If your child has club foot, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 21\/01\/2015 Next review due: 21\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 85 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Club foot Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Vanessa and Jon's daughter was born with club feet. They describe coping with the diagnosis and choosing her treatment, and an expert compares physiotherapy with surgery. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Pregnancy and baby guide Children's feet video External links National Childbirth Trust Perinatal Institute STEPS Leg and foot problems in children Common problems affecting the legs and feet of children under five Screening in pregnancy Screening for abnormalities in pregnancy, including inherited disorders such as sickle cell Find and choose services for Club foot Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Talking therapies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/stress-anxiety-depression\/Pages\/benefits-of-talking-therapy.aspx","content":"Benefits of talking therapy - Stress, anxiety and depression - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stress, anxiety and depression Common problems I feel really down   I'm so stressed   I feel anxious and panicky   I feel angry often   I think I have the winter blues I'm worried someone is depressed   I'm worried my child might be depressed I think I'm having panic attacks Mood self-assessment What you can do now Low mood and depression How to feel happier Beating the winter blues Tips for coping with depression Exercise for depression Fear and phobias Anxiety in children Dealing with panic attacks Coping with fear Ten ways to fight your fears Getting help with phobias Stress Breathing exercise for stress Ten stress busters Beat stress at work Easy time-management tips Coping with exam stress Coping with money worries Anger management How to control your anger Expert tips on child anger Therapy and counselling Different types of therapy Benefits of talking therapy Find the right therapist Mental health helplines Self-help therapies Can I get free therapy or counselling? Depression support groups Five steps to wellbeing Learn about the five steps Mindfulness for mental wellbeing Connect for mental wellbeing Get active for mental wellbeing Give for mental wellbeing Learn for mental wellbeing Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel Learn Life Skills: LLTTF Moodzone mental wellbeing audio guides Real stories 'I beat agoraphobia' Read how Claire overcame agoraphobia with the help of group therapy 'I run to boost my mood' Running two or three times a week helps protect Liz from depression 'I used to hit my husband' An anger management course helped Florence end her violent behaviour towards her husband 'How I've learnt to deal with stress' Stress-reduction workshops taught Arvind how to control his stress levels 'I burned out from work stress' When Liz's doctor told her she had burned out from stress, she initially found it hard to believe Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel Mental wellbeing audio guides Panic attacks Podcast with expert advice on how to tackle panic attacks. Anxiety and worry Podcast offering expert advice about worry and anxiety. Anxiety control Podcast explaining how you can take control of your anxiety. Unhelpful thinking Podcast to help you replace negativity with positive thinking. Depression Podcast on how to cope with low mood and depression. Low confidence Podcast providing tips to help you build your confidence. Sleep problems Podcast with expert tips on how to get a good night's sleep. Problem solving Podcast to help you make problems more manageable. Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel   Listen to all the Moodzone audio guides You are here: Health A-Z Stress, anxiety and depression Share: Save: Print: Benefits of talking therapy Talking therapies can help all sorts of people in lots of different situations. You may also hear them referred to as talking treatments or psychological therapies. Talking therapies work just as well whether you're old or young, male or female, black or white, gay or straight, rich or poor. Your educational background makes no difference either. Talking therapy is for anyone who's going through a bad time or has emotional problems they can't sort out on their own. For many adults, they may be the same or more effective than medication. Can you get talking therapies on the NHS? You may be able to get a talking therapy on the NHS in your area. You're most likely to be referred for counselling or cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). CBT helps you understand how your feelings affect your thoughts and behaviour. Your GP can refer you, or sometimes you can refer yourself to your local psychological therapies team.  You may have to wait a few weeks for it to start and may not have much choice in who you see. Read about talking therapies on the NHS. Talking therapies are also widely available privately. Find out more about the different types of therapies available. How a talking therapy can help Sometimes it's easier to talk to a stranger than to relatives or friends. During talking therapy, a trained counsellor or therapist listens to you and helps you find your own answers to problems, without judging you. The therapist will give you time to talk, cry, shout or just think. It's an opportunity to look at your problems in a different way with someone who will respect you and your opinions. Usually, you'll talk one-to-one with the therapist. Sometimes talking treatments are held in groups or couples, such as relationship counselling. Although there are lots of different types of talking therapy, they all have a similar aim: to help you feel better. Some people say that talking therapies don't make their problems go away, but they find it easier to cope with them and feel happier.  Talking therapy for mental health problems Talking therapies can help if you have: depression anxiety an eating disorder a phobia an addiction  They're often used if you've been diagnosed with a serious mental health condition, such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.  Talking therapies are commonly used alongside medicines. Talking therapy after difficult life events If you're going through a sad and upsetting time, talking therapies can help you deal with it. This could be after a relative or friend has died, after finding out you have a serious illness, if you're struggling with infertility, or if you've lost your job. Physical illness and talking therapy People with long-term health conditions are more vulnerable to depression, and talking therapies have been proven to help. Talking therapies may improve your quality of life if you have: diabetes multiple sclerosis heart disease  a stroke Talking therapy for the over-65s Older people, especially those with depression, are as likely to benefit from talking therapies as everyone else. Depression in later life, especially over the age of 65, is often dismissed as a normal part of ageing. But this isn't the case, and talking therapy can improve your enjoyment of life if you're feeling low. Take this short test to see if you're depressed. Talking therapy and past abuse If you've been physically or sexually abused, or experienced discrimination or racism, you may feel able to cope with life better after a course of talking therapy. Talking therapy for relationship problems Couples therapy can save a relationship that's in trouble or help you through separation and divorce. Ideally, a couple should go to counselling together, but if your partner refuses to join you, counselling can help you sort out lots of things on your own. Read about how to have a healthy divorce. Troubled families and talking therapy Family therapy is talking therapy that involves the whole family. It can be especially helpful for children with depression or a behavioural problem, or whose parents are splitting up. It can also help families where someone has an eating disorder, mental health condition, or addiction. Talking therapy for anger Talking therapy can help people who find it difficult to keep their anger under control. Read about how to manage anger. Children's talking therapy Talking therapy works as well for children as it does for adults. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends talking therapy rather than medicines for children who are depressed.  See the NICE guidelines on depression in children and young people. It can also help children with anxiety, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), or who are in physical pain much of the time. Mental and emotional health: talking therapies Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Learn about different talking therapies that can help people overcome a range of problems, from depression to stress. Tip: check with your GP whether there are any Improving Access to Psychological Treatment (IAPT) services in your area. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Page last reviewed: 03\/01\/2016 Next review due: 03\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 79 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful External links Big White Wall: online mental health support British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP): finding the right therapist CBT register: search for a therapist It's good to talk: find a therapist How to be happy Six tips to boost your mood and help you feel happier Services near you Find emotional support services in your area Find and compare services Services Anxiety Child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Counselling for alcohol addiction Counselling for drug addiction Depression Depression self-help groups Mental health information and support Psychological therapies (IAPT) Stress Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices links Are you having panic attacks? Find the right therapist for you Struggling with stress? Tips for coping with depression Talking therapies explained A guide to the different types of talking therapy and how they can help you Boost your mood with online therapy Living Life To The Full is a practical course to learn coping skills for when life gets on top of you Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tamiflu","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pandemic-flu","content":"Swine flu (H1N1) Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Swine flu (H1N1)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pandemic-flu Clinical trials Swine flu   Swine flu is the popular name for influenza (flu) caused by a relatively new strain of influenza virus A. It was responsible for the flu pandemic in 2009-10. The virus is officially known as influenza virus A\/H1N1pdm09. The swine flu pandemic The virus was first identified in Mexico in April 2009 and was also known as Mexican flu. It became known as swine flu because the virus closely resembled known influenza viruses that cause illness in pigs. It spread rapidly from country to country because it was a new type of flu virus that few people were immune to. The pandemic proved to be relatively mild and was not as serious as originally predicted. As in other countries, most cases reported in the UK were mild. However, a small number of cases resulted in serious illness and death. These were mostly in the very elderly, very young, pregnant women, or people with a pre-existing health condition, such as cancer, that had already weakened their immune systems. On August 10 2010, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the pandemic was officially over. The virus now circulates worldwide as one of three seasonal flu viruses. The other viruses are influenza virus B and influenza virus A\/H3N2. Symptoms of flu The symptoms of flu caused by the H1N1pdm09 virus are similar to those of other types, and include: a sudden fever \u2013 a temperature of 38C (100.4F) or above tiredness aching muscles or joint pain a headache a runny or blocked nose Most people recover within a week, even without special treatment. However, some people are at a higher risk of complications and are recommended to have the seasonal flu jab. The 2015-16 seasonal flu jab includes protection against three types of flu virus, including H1N1pdm09. When to see your GP If you are otherwise fit and healthy, there is usually no need to visit your GP if you have flu-like symptoms. See your GP if you have flu-like symptoms and are at a higher risk of complications of seasonal flu. This includes: children under two years old anyone over the age of 65 pregnant women children and adults with an underlying health condition (particularly long-term heart or respiratory disease) children and adults with weakened immune systems Vaccination The seasonal flu jab is available for free on the NHS for those at risk and is given as an annual injection to: adults over the age of 18 at risk of flu (including everyone over 65) children aged from six months to two years who are at risk of flu The flu vaccine is also offered as an annual nasal spray to: children aged 2 to 18 years at risk of flu children aged two, three and four all children in school years 1 and 2 Read more information about who should have the flu jab and why pregnant women should have the flu jab. How is swine flu treated? The best remedy is to rest at home, keep warm and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration. You can take paracetamol or ibuprofen to lower a high temperature and relieve aches. If further treatment is needed or complications develop, medication is available to treat flu caused by the H1N1pdm09 virus. This includes: antiviral medications \u2013 oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza) help relieve symptoms and reduce the risk of serious complications antibiotics \u2013 to combat bacterial infections such as pneumonia, which may occur as a complication of influenza If you are prescribed antivirals, you will need to pay a prescription charge (unless your prescriptions are normally free of charge). Read the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines on antivirals for the treatment of flu.  Preventing the spread of flu The H1N1pdm09 virus is spread in exactly the same way as the common cold and other flu viruses. The virus is contained in the millions of tiny droplets that come out of the nose and mouth when someone coughs or sneezes. These droplets typically spread about 1 metre (3 feet). They hang suspended in the air for a while, but then land on surfaces, where the virus can survive for up to 24 hours. Anyone who touches these surfaces can spread the virus by touching anything else. The virus is also transmitted by infected people who cough or sneeze into their hands and then touch other people or objects before washing their hands. Everyday items at home and in public places may have traces of the virus. These include food, door handles, remote controls, hand rails, paper money and computer keyboards. People usually become infected by picking up the virus on their hands from contaminated objects and then placing their hands near their mouth or nose. It is also possible to breathe in the virus if it is suspended in airborne droplets. Good hygiene, such as hand washing and cleaning, is the most effective way of slowing the spread of flu. Antiviral medication and the seasonal flu jab are also offered to people at risk. Read more information about: preventing seasonal flu home hygiene You can also read the NICE guidelines on antivirals for the prevention of flu. The Tokkels: flu jabs Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Flu is a highly infectious illness caused by the flu virus. It spreads rapidly through small droplets coughed or sneezed into the air by an infected person. Some people are at greater risk of developing serious complications of flu, such as bronchitis and pneumonia. The flu vaccination is offered to people in at-risk groups. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Winter health Tips and advice on how to stay healthy and well through the cold, dark days of winter Page last reviewed: 14\/10\/2014 Next review due: 14\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 686 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 271  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 128  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bird flu Flu in the news How do I take someone's temperature? Seasonal flu Winter health External links Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Department of Health Foreign & Commonwealth Office Public Health England World Health Organization Children's flu vaccine The children's nasal spray flu vaccine is for two-, three- and four-year-olds, and children in school years one, two and three, plus children with long-term health problems The flu jab Flu is highly infectious \u2013 but the annual flu jab can help prevent it Help fight flu Sign up for the flu survey to help researchers at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine track the spread of flu and discover more about it. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tapeworm infections","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tapeworm-infections","content":"Tapeworm infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tapeworm infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tapeworm-infections Clinical trials Tapeworm infections Tapeworm-infections Symptoms Tapeworm-infections Causes Tapeworm-infections Diagnosis Tapeworm-infections Treatment Tapeworm-infections Complications Tapeworm-infections Prevention Introduction  Tapeworms are parasites that can live in a person's intestine (bowel). They don't always cause symptoms and when they do they are often mistaken for another illness. Tapeworm infections are most commonly seen in developing countries and are rare in the UK. Tapeworms are known medically as cestodes. They are usually flat and ribbon-like and made up of segments. Some adult worms grow to 4.5-9m (15-30 feet) in length. Humans can catch them by: touching contaminated faeces (stools) and then placing their hands near their mouth swallowing food or water containing traces of contaminated faeces eating raw contaminated pork, beef or fish Read more about the causes of a tapeworm infection. How do I know if I have a tapeworm? You may not know you have a tapeworm infection until you see segments of the worm in your stools (poo). The segments will look like white grains of rice but sometimes longer sections of the worm may need to be seen by an expert to confirm diagnosis. A tapeworm infection does not always cause symptoms. Or if there are symptoms \u2013 typically stomach pain and sometimes vomiting and diarrhoea \u2013 they are often mistaken for another illness. Read more information about the symptoms of a tapeworm infection. See your GP if you see what you think are segments of a tapeworm in your stools. Infection is usually diagnosed from a stool sample but further tests may be needed depending on the type of tapeworm infection. Read more about how tapeworm infections are diagnosed. Treating tapeworm infections If you're diagnosed with a tapeworm infection you'll need treatment to get rid of it. The beef tapeworm lives only in your intestine and is easily treated with tablets. But other tapeworms can lead to serious complications and those that develop as larvae in your body are more difficult to treat. Read more information about treating tapeworm infections and complications of a tapeworm infection. Avoiding tapeworm infections It is important to prepare food properly to avoid a tapeworm infection. Raw meat and fish in particular must be cooked and stored correctly. Vegetables and fruit should be washed thoroughly before they are eaten. Your personal hygiene is even more important if you are in close contact with animals, or travelling in a country where tapeworm infections are more common. Read more information about preventing tapeworm infections. Humans can get a tapeworm infection by eating raw contaminated meat or fish  How to prepare and cook food safely How to prepare and cook food correctly to reduce the risk of food poisoning, including E. coli Page last reviewed: 04\/09\/2014 Next review due: 04\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 306 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 172  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food safety Food hygiene Infections from animals to people Travel health External links Food Standards Agency Food safety How to prevent food poisoning at home, including E. coli, with advice on food safety and keeping germs in check NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tattoo removal","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/tattoo-removal.aspx","content":"Tattoo removal Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Tattoo removal Unwanted tattoos can be removed gradually over a series of sessions using a laser.  The energy from the laser breaks down the tattoo ink into tiny fragments, which are eventually absorbed into the bloodstream and safely passed out of the body. This process is rarely carried out on the NHS. Before you go ahead\u2026 If you're thinking of having a tattoo removed, you should be prepared for the potential discomfort and the limitations.  Cost: In the UK, private clinics charge about £150 a session to remove a small tattoo and up to £800 for a larger one. Limitations:  It can be a frustratingly slow process: 10 or more sessions may be needed to remove the tattoo. Many tattoos are not entirely removed \u2013 it's quite common to have some fragments left in the skin. Some colours don\u2019t fade as well as others. Tattoo removal is not recommended for people with dark skin, a suntan or fake tan. It's not suitable if you\u2019re in the early stages of pregnancy, although there are no known risks for women who are breastfeeding. Safety: Take time to find a reputable practitioner who practises in a clean, safe and appropriate environment. Ask the practitioner what you should do if something were to go wrong. What it involves If you have hair on the area of skin to be treated, you\u2019d need to shave before the appointment. On the day, you'd wear specially designed goggles to protect your eyes during the procedure. A local anaesthetic cream may be applied. The practitioner would then press a hand-held device to your skin and trigger a laser. Some people say this feels like an elastic band snapping at your skin. The session would take about 10-30 minutes, depending on the size of the tattoo. The tattoo should become progressively lighter with each treatment, but it's a long, slow process. Aloe vera gel would be applied afterwards, and you may leave with a bandage or patch. Afterwards The skin may be red with a raised rash for a short while afterwards. Holding an ice pack to the skin may help (try a pack of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel). Your skin would also be more sensitive to the sun, so you'd need to avoid sun exposure and tanning beds for at least a week afterwards, and use sunscreen. As treatment sessions progress, the skin may bleed slightly before scabbing over for about a week. It may help to regularly apply aloe vera gel, and apply Vaseline if there is any blistering or scabbing. You should also avoid: soap or perfumed products on the area for the first 48 hours strenuous activities for a couple of days swimming and saunas until the scab has dropped off (as these may slow the healing process) Risks Possible risks are: some colours not completely fading \u2013 yellow, green and purple ink requires more energy (more sessions) to fade than black, blue and red a small chance your skin may become temporarily darker or paler than the surrounding skin a slight chance you\u2019re left with a permanent scar (3 in 100 patients develop a scar) What to do if you have problems If you experience problems with healing, rashes or skin pigmentation changes, take up the matter with your practitioner through the clinic where you were treated. It is best that you go back to the practitioner who treated you if there are any complications. If this is not possible, you can go to your GP or local accident and emergency (A&E) department. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: Can I get my tattoo removed on the NHS?  Body piercing  Save Face: find a practitioner for non-surgical cosmetic procedures  Look after your skin Benefit your skin by stopping smoking, plus how to protect your skin against sun damage and more NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tay-Sachs disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tay-Sachs-disease","content":"Tay-Sachs disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tay-Sachs disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tay-Sachs-disease Clinical trials Tay-Sachs disease Tay-Sachs-disease Symptoms Tay-Sachs-disease Causes Tay-Sachs-disease Diagnosis Tay-Sachs-disease Treatment Introduction  Tay-Sachs disease is a rare and usually fatal genetic disorder that causes progressive damage to the nervous system. Symptoms usually begin before a baby is six months old. Their development slows down and they gradually lose their ability to move. The most noticeable early symptoms include a baby being excessively startled by sudden noises and red dots appearing near the middle of their eyes. The child then develops problems such as muscle weakness, loss of vision, loss of hearing and seizures. Most children with the condition die before they're four years old. Less common forms of Tay-Sachs disease can begin later in childhood or even early adulthood. These usually progress less rapidly, although it's usually fatal. Read more about the symptoms of Tay-Sachs disease. What causes Tay-Sachs disease? Tay-Sachs disease is caused by a mutation in the HEXA gene. A genetic mutation is a permanent alteration in the DNA sequence that makes up a gene. It causes one or more processes of the body to not work properly.  A mutated HEXA gene results in the body not producing an enzyme called Hexosaminidase-A (Hex-A). Without this enzyme, a fatty substance called GM2 ganglioside builds up in the cells of the brain and nerves, and stops them working normally, eventually destroying them. Both parents have to be carriers of a HEXA mutation to be at risk of having a child with Tay-Sachs disease. If both parents are carriers, their children will have a 25% chance of developing the condition. Read more about the causes of Tay-Sachs disease. Testing for Tay-Sachs disease Screening for Tay-Sachs disease is recommended for people in high-risk groups before planning a family. In the UK, this includes people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent and anyone with a history of the condition in their family. Screening can take place at two points, either before or after a baby is conceived. If the condition is diagnosed in an unborn baby, the parents can decide whether or not to continue with the pregnancy. Read more about testing for Tay-Sachs disease. How is Tay-Sachs disease treated? There's currently no cure for Tay-Sachs disease, so treatment involves making the child feel as comfortable as possible by treating the associated symptoms. Research is being carried out into possible cures for Tay-Sachs disease, but this is still at an early stage. Read more about treating Tay-Sachs disease. Who is affected? Tay-Sachs disease used to be most common in people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Most Jewish people in the UK are Ashkenazi Jews. It's thought that around 1 in 25 Ashkenazi Jewish people are carriers of the mutated gene that causes Tay-Sachs disease. However, with screening, the condition is now rare and most cases now occur in people who aren't of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. It's estimated that only about 1 in every 360,000 children born worldwide has Tay-Sachs disease. Information about your child If your child has Tay-Sachs disease, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 13\/02\/2015 Next review due: 13\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 154 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bereavement Caring for a terminally ill child Serious conditions in children Genetic counselling External links Contact a Family: Tay-Sachs disease Genetic Alliance UK National Tay-Sachs and Allied Diseases (NTSAD) If antenatal screening finds a problem Next steps if screening tests show something might be wrong Bereavement Information and real stories about coping with different types of bereavement NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"TB","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tuberculosis","content":"Tuberculosis (TB) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tuberculosis (TB)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tuberculosis Clinical trials Tuberculosis Tuberculosis Symptoms Tuberculosis Causes Tuberculosis Diagnosis Tuberculosis Treatment Introduction  Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial infection spread through inhaling tiny droplets from the coughs or sneezes of an infected person. It is a serious condition, but can be cured with proper treatment. TB mainly affects the lungs. However, it can affect any part of the body, including the glands, bones and nervous system. Symptoms of TB Typical symptoms of TB include: a persistent cough that lasts more than three weeks and usually brings up phlegm, which may be bloody weight loss night sweats high temperature (fever) tiredness and fatigue loss of appetite new swellings that haven't gone away after a few weeks You should see a GP if you have a cough that lasts more than three weeks or if you cough up blood. Read more about the symptoms of TB and diagnosing TB. What causes TB? TB is caused by a bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis. TB that affects the lungs is the most contagious type, but it usually only spreads after prolonged exposure to someone with the illness. For example, it often spreads within a family who live in the same house. In most healthy people, the immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness) kills the bacteria, and you have no symptoms. Sometimes the immune system cannot kill the bacteria, but manages to prevent it spreading in the body. This means you will not have any symptoms, but the bacteria will remain in your body. This is known as \"latent TB\".  If the immune system fails to kill or contain the infection, it can spread within the lungs or other parts of the body and symptoms will develop within a few weeks or months. This is known as \"active TB\". Latent TB could develop into an active TB infection at a later date, particularly if your immune system becomes weakened. Read more about the causes of TB. Who is affected? Before antibiotics were introduced, TB was a major health problem in the UK. Nowadays, the condition is much less common. However, in the last 20 years, TB cases have gradually increased, particularly among ethnic minority communities who are originally from countries where TB is more common. In 2014, more than 6,500 cases of TB were reported in England. Of these, around 4,700 affected people who were born outside the UK. It's estimated that around one-third of the world's population is infected with latent TB. Of these, up to 10% will become active at some point. How TB is treated With treatment, TB can usually be cured. Most people will need a course of antibiotics, usually for six months. Several different antibiotics are used. This is because some forms of TB are resistant to certain antibiotics. If you are infected with a drug-resistant form of TB, treatment with six or more different medications may be needed. If you are in close contact with someone who has TB, tests may be carried out to see if you are also infected. These can include a chest X-ray, blood tests, and a skin test called the Mantoux test. Read more about treating TB. Tuberculosis vaccination The BCG vaccine can provide effective protection against TB in up to 8 out of 10 people who are given it. Currently, BCG vaccinations are only recommended for groups of people who are at a higher risk of developing TB. This includes children living in areas with high rates of TB, or those who have close family members from countries with high TB rates, and people under the age of 16 who are going to live and work with local people in an area with high rates of TB for more than three months. It's also recommended that some people, such as healthcare workers, are vaccinated because of the increased risk of contracting TB while working. Countries with high TB rates Parts of the world that have high rates of TB include: Africa \u2013 particularly sub-Saharan Africa (all the African countries south of the Sahara desert) and west Africa southeast Asia \u2013 including India, Pakistan, Indonesia and Bangladesh Russia China South America the western Pacific region (to the west of the Pacific Ocean) \u2013 including Vietnam and Cambodia For a world map showing countries with high rates of TB, see the World Health Organization (WHO) website. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/12\/2014 Next review due: 03\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1129 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 526  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 236  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 253  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chest infection Travel health Vaccinations Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? External links Public Health England (PHE): Got TB? Read this (PDF, 942kb) PHE: Information about TB for people in prisons (PDF, 679kb) PHE: Pregnancy and tuberculosis (PDF, 150kb) PHE: Substance misuse and TB - for those affected (PDF, 315kb) PHE: Substance misuse and TB - for families affected (PDF, 275kb) PHE: Tests conducted in TB clinics (PDF, 49kb) Fit for Travel: tuberculosis BCG tuberculosis (TB) vaccine How the BCG vaccine provides protection against tuberculosis (TB) and who needs it Cough Find out about the main causes of a cough, when to seek medical advice, and what treatments are available NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Td\/IPV (3-in-1) booster","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/3-in-1-teenage-booster.aspx","content":"3-in-1 teenage booster - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: 3-in-1 teenage booster The teenage booster, also known as the 3-in-1 or the Td\/IPV vaccine, is given as a single injection into the upper arm to boost your child's protection against three separate diseases: tetanus, diphtheria and polio. Who should have the 3-in-1 booster? The 3-in-1 teenage booster, is available routinely on the NHS for all young people aged 14 (school year 9). It is generally given at secondary school at the same time as the Men ACWY vaccine. As a parent, you will be sent a letter from your child's school a week or so before the vaccinations are planned to ask for your or your child's consent. The brand name of the 3-in-1 teenage booster given in the UK is REVAXIS. Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for REVAXIS. Read more about which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster jab. How safe is the 3-in-1 booster vaccine? The 3-in-1 teenage booster is a very safe vaccine but, as with all vaccines, some children may have minor side effects, such as swelling, redness or tenderness where you have the injection. Sometimes, a small painless lump develops, but it usually disappears in a few weeks. Read more about the possible side effects of the 3-in-1 vaccination. Read answers to the common questions that parents ask about the 3-in-1 teenage booster jab. This NHS leaflet has more information on immunisations at secondary school. Page last reviewed: 27\/10\/2014 Next review due: 27\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 98 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful NHS Choices links NHS vaccination schedule Common questions about vaccination External links healthtalk.org: real life vaccination stories from parents Oxford Vaccine Group: 3-in-1 booster  NHS leaflet: immunisations for young people (PDF, 491kb) Teen boys 15-18 Turning into a couch potato? Want the truth about drugs and safer sex? Find out how you can get yourself sorted Teen girls 15-18 Read about teen girl health issues, including healthy eating, skin problems and having sex for the first time NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Teeth grinding","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/teeth-grinding","content":"Teeth grinding (bruxism) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Teeth grinding (bruxism)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview teeth-grinding Real stories teeth-grinding Clinical trials Teeth grinding (bruxism) teeth-grinding Symptoms teeth-grinding Causes teeth-grinding Treatment Introduction  Bruxism is the medical term for grinding the teeth and clenching the jaw. People sometimes grind their teeth without it causing any symptoms or problems. But regular, persistent teeth grinding can cause jaw pain and discomfort and wear down your teeth. It can also cause headaches and earache. Read more about the symptoms of bruxism. Most cases of teeth grinding (nearly 80%) occur subconsciously during sleep. It's usually associated with contributing factors, such as stress or anxiety. Bruxism also affects people when they're awake, although this is more likely to be clenching the teeth and jaw, rather than grinding their teeth. Most people do it subconsciously while concentrating or when they're in stressful situations. Many people with bruxism find it will come and go. It's likely to be worse during stressful periods. What causes bruxism? Bruxism almost always occurs in association with other factors. About 70% of bruxism cases that occur during sleep are thought be related to stress and anxiety. There's also an association between bruxism and obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA). OSA is a sleep disorder where your breathing is interrupted during sleep. How bruxism and OSA affect each other isn't currently fully understood. Teeth grinding can also be caused by taking antipsychotic and antidepressant medication, particularly a type of antidepressant known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Your lifestyle can also have an effect. For example, regularly drinking alcohol, smoking and using recreational drugs such as ecstasy and cocaine increases your risk of bruxism. Doctors sometimes refer to teeth grinding caused by an underlying condition as primary bruxism. Teeth grinding associated with a medication, condition or lifestyle factors is often known as secondary bruxism. Read more about the causes of bruxism. Treating bruxism There are a number of possible treatments for teeth grinding, but only a few have been shown to be effective. Behavioural therapies and the use of mouth guards or mouth splints can be effective in managing the symptoms associated with bruxism. Mouth guards and mouth splints work in the same way by reducing the sensation of clenching or grinding teeth, and also help prevent any wear on the teeth. Other treatments, such as muscle-relaxation exercises and sleep hygiene, may also help manage your symptoms. If you grind your teeth while you're asleep, you may need to wear a mouth guard or mouth splint to protect your teeth from further damage. If you have an anxiety or stress-related problem, a course of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) may be recommended. The aim of CBT is to help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and how you act. It may be possible to break the habit of teeth grinding using habit-reversal techniques. Making some simple lifestyle changes, such as giving up smoking (if you smoke), reducing your alcohol consumption and managing stress may also help. Read more about treating bruxism. Bruxism is the medical term used to describe teeth grinding and jaw clenching  Who's affected by bruxism? Teeth grinding affects more than six million people in the UK. But the severity of the symptoms and the frequency of grinding varies. It can occur in both children and adults, although it is most common in adults between the ages of 25 and 44. Children's teeth From brushing their first tooth to their first trip to the dentist, here's how to take care of your children's teeth Page last reviewed: 05\/09\/2014 Next review due: 05\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 239 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dental abscess Dental health Find an NHS dentist Root canal treatment Stress, anxiety and depression External links British Dental Health Foundation: teeth grinding British Snoring & Sleep Apnoea Association The Bruxism Association Stress Management Society Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening Finding an NHS dentist How to find an NHS dentist, including where to seek help if you have difficulties locating one in your local area NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Teeth whitening","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/dentalhealth\/Pages\/teeth-whitening.aspx","content":"Teeth whitening - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Teeth whitening Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Dental health Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus More and more people are paying for brighter, whiter teeth. But does teeth whitening work and is it safe? Here are the answers to common questions about the treatment. What is teeth whitening? Teeth whitening involves bleaching your teeth to make them lighter. Teeth whitening can't make your teeth brilliant white, but it can lighten the existing colour by several shades. Who can perform teeth whitening? Teeth whitening is a form of dentistry and should only be performed by a dentist or another regulated dental professional, such as a dental hygienist or dental therapist, on the prescription of a dentist. Some beauty salons offer teeth whitening, but this is illegal if there's no dental professional present, and it may put your oral health at risk. You can also buy DIY home teeth whitening kits but these may also carry risks. What happens during teeth whitening at the dentist? If you have teeth whitening you will need to make several visits to the dental surgery over a couple of months. The dentist will take an impression of your teeth to make a mouthguard and will instruct you how to use it with a bleaching gel. Then, using your mouthguard at home, you regularly apply the gel for a specified period of time over two to four weeks. Some whitening gels can be left on for up to eight hours at a time, which shortens the treatment period to one week. Another type of teeth whitening system that a dentist can provide is called laser whitening, which is also known as power whitening. This is where a bleaching product is painted onto your teeth and then a light or laser is shone on them to activate the whitening. Laser whitening takes about an hour. Can any dentist whiten teeth? Yes, provided they are registered with the General Dental Council. Registered dental therapists and dental hygienists can also carry out teeth whitening on the prescription of a dentist. To find out if a dental professional is registered with the GDC you can check online or call 0207 167 6000. What about home kits and beauty salons for teeth whitening? Only go to a registered dental professional for teeth whitening because whitening by people who aren't qualified, for example in beauty salons, is illegal. Home kits also carry risks. What are the risks of home kits and salon teeth whitening? Some home kits don't contain enough of the whitening product to be effective. More generally, if a dental professional is not doing the whitening, the mouthguard provided may not fit properly so some of the bleaching gel may leak out onto your gums and into your mouth, causing blistering and sensitivity. Where teeth whitening is carried out in beauty salons by staff without any training or dental qualifications it not only carries a risk to your oral health, but is also illegal. Can you have your teeth whitened on the NHS? You can only have your teeth whitened on the NHS if there's a medical reason for it. For example, this might be to lighten teeth that have discoloured because the nerve has died. Otherwise, teeth whitening by a dentist or other dental professional can only be done privately because it's considered to be a cosmetic treatment. Costs vary and, as a general rule, laser whitening is more expensive than professional bleaching. Find out which dental treatments are available on the NHS. How do you go about getting teeth whitening? Your dentist will advise you whether whitening is right for you. It may be that teeth whitening isn't suitable, for example if you have gum disease or crowns. Find your nearest dentist here. What questions should I ask the dentist before going ahead? Don't be afraid to ask simple questions about the types of whitening treatment available, what results you can expect and whether the work is guaranteed for a certain amount of time. Also, ask them what they consider to be the risks in your particular case, for example increasing sensitivity of the teeth. Try to talk to other people who have had the same treatment or visit another dentist for a second opinion until you feel confident. Always ask for a written treatment plan and price estimate before going ahead. Is teeth whitening permanent? No, teeth whitening isn't permanent. It can last from a few months to up to three years, but this varies from person to person. Generally, the whitening effect won't last as long if you smoke or drink red wine, tea or coffee, which can all stain your teeth. Will teeth whitening work on false teeth? No. Teeth whitening won't work on dentures, crowns, fillings or veneers. What are the risks of teeth whitening? No matter what treatment you use, there is a chance your gums can be sensitive to the chemicals used in teeth whitening, especially if you already have sensitive teeth. There's also a chance of burns to gums and some of the whitening kits used at home can harm tooth enamel. What if I'm not happy with the results? If you're concerned that teeth whitening by a dental professional has harmed you, contact the Dental Complaints Service on 0208 253 0800. This is an expert, free and independent service that can help if you have a complaint about private dental care. If you think your teeth whitening has been carried out illegally (that is, by someone not qualified or registered to perform it) contact the General Dental Council on 0207 167 6000 or email illegalpractice@gdc-uk.org.  Read more about how to look after your teeth. Page last reviewed: 25\/11\/2015 Next review due: 25\/11\/2017 More articles on: Dental health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 575 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 222  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 65  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 116  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Gum disease Tooth decay External links British Dental Health Foundation: teeth whitening facts General Dental Council: teeth whitening advice Tooth Whitening Information Group Find dental services near you Find and compare services Services Dentistry and Orthodontics Dentists Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Thinking of having a cosmetic procedure? Read this guide to understand the risks and effectiveness of different cosmetic treatments... Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Teething","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/teething-and-tooth-care.aspx","content":"Baby teething symptoms - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Baby teething symptoms When it comes to teething, all babies are different. But your baby will probably get their first tooth some time during their first year. Keep reading to find out how to spot when your baby is teething and what order your baby's teeth are likely to appear in. When do babies start teething? Some babies are born with their first teeth. Others start teething before they are 4 months old, and some after 12 months. But most babies start teething at around 6 months.  Teething symptoms Baby teeth sometimes emerge with no pain or discomfort at all. At other times, you may notice that: your baby's gum is sore and red where the tooth is coming through one cheek is flushed your baby is dribbling more than usual they are gnawing and chewing on things a lot they are more fretful than usual  Read our tips on how to help your teething baby. Some people think that teething causes other symptoms, such as diarrhoea and fever, but there's no evidence to support this. You know your baby best. If they have any symptoms that are causing you concern, then seek medical advice. You can call NHS 111 or contact your GP. Read more about spotting the signs of serious illness. What order do baby teeth appear in? Here's a rough guide to how babies' teeth usually emerge: bottom incisors (bottom front teeth) \u2013 these are usually the first to come through, usually at around 5 to 7 months top incisors (top front teeth) \u2013 these tend to come through at about 6 to 8 months top lateral incisors (either side of the top front teeth) \u2013 these come through at around 9 to 11 months bottom lateral incisors (either side of the bottom front teeth) \u2013 these come through at around 10 to 12 months first molars (back teeth) \u2013 these come through at around 12 to 16 months canines (towards the back of the mouth) \u2013 these come through at around 16 to 20 months second molars \u2013 these come through at around 20 to 30 months Most children will have all of their milk teeth by the time they are two and a half years old.  Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Is my baby teething? Media last reviewed: 22\/01\/2015 Next review due: 22\/01\/2017 Page last reviewed: 10\/02\/2016 Next review due: 10\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 151 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Teething tips How to help your baby through teething, including advice on gels, teething rings, painkillers and avoiding teething rash NHS Choices links Can I give my child painkillers?   Fluoride When to start brushing your baby's teeth Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Telogen effluvium","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/hair-loss","content":"Hair loss (alopecia) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hair loss  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Hair-loss Real stories Hair-loss Clinical trials Hair-loss Community Hair loss Hair-loss Treatment Introduction  Alopecia is the general medical term for hair loss. There are many types of hair loss with different symptoms and causes. Some of the more common types of hair loss are described below, including: male- and female-pattern baldness  alopecia areata scarring alopecia anagen effluvium telogen effluvium Male- and female-pattern baldness Male-pattern baldness is the most common type of hair loss, affecting around half of all men by 50 years of age. It usually starts around the late twenties or early thirties and most men have some degree of hair loss by their late thirties. It generally follows a pattern of a receding hairline, followed by thinning of the hair on the crown and temples, leaving a horseshoe shape around the back and sides of the head. Sometimes it can progress to complete baldness, although this is uncommon. Male-pattern baldness is hereditary, which means it runs in families. It's thought to be caused by oversensitive hair follicles, linked to having too much of a certain male hormone. As well as affecting men, it can sometimes affect women (female-pattern baldness). During female-pattern baldness, hair usually only thins on top of the head. It's not clear if female-pattern baldness is hereditary and the causes are less well understood. However, it tends to be more noticeable in women who have been through the menopause (when a woman's periods stop at around age 52), perhaps because they have fewer female hormones. Alopecia areata Alopecia areata causes patches of baldness about the size of a large coin. They usually appear on the scalp but can occur anywhere on the body. It can occur at any age, but mostly affects teenagers and young adults. In most cases of alopecia areata, hair will grow back in a few months. At first, hair may grow back fine and white, but over time it should thicken and regain its normal colour. Some people go on to develop a more severe form of hair loss, such as: alopecia totalis (no scalp hair) alopecia universalis (no hair on the scalp and body) Alopecia areata is caused by a problem with the immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness). It's more common among people with other autoimmune conditions, such as an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism), diabetes or Down's syndrome. It's also believed some people's genes make them more susceptible to alopecia areata, as one in five people with the condition have a family history of the condition. Alopecia areata can occur at any age, although it's more common in people aged 15-29. It affects one or two people in every 1,000 in the UK. Scarring alopecia  Scarring alopecia, also known as cicatricial alopecia, is usually caused by complications of another condition. In this type of alopecia, the hair follicle (the small hole in your skin that an individual hair grows out of) is completely destroyed. This means your hair won't grow back. Depending on the condition, the skin where the hair has fallen out is likely to be affected in some way. Conditions which can cause scarring alopecia include: scleroderma \u2013 a condition affecting the body's connective (supporting) tissues, resulting in hard, puffy and itchy skin lichen planus \u2013 an itchy rash affecting many areas of the body discoid lupus \u2013 a mild form of lupus affecting the skin, causing scaly marks and hair loss folliculitis decalvans \u2013 a rare form of alopecia that most commonly affects men, causing baldness and scarring of the affected areas frontal fibrosing alopecia \u2013 a type of alopecia that affects post-menopausal women where the hair follicles are damaged, and the hair falls out and is unable to grow back Scarring alopecia occurs in both males and females, but is less common in children than adults. It accounts for about 7% of hair loss cases. Anagen effluvium Anagen effluvium is widespread hair loss that can affect your scalp, face and body. One of the most common causes of this type of hair loss is the cancer treatment chemotherapy. In some cases, other cancer treatments \u2013 including immunotherapy and radiotherapy \u2013 may also cause hair loss. The hair loss is usually noticeable within a few weeks of starting treatment. However, not all chemotherapy drugs cause hair loss and sometimes the hair loss is so small it's hardly noticeable. It may be possible to reduce hair loss from chemotherapy by wearing a special cap that keeps the scalp cool. However, scalp cooling is not always effective and not widely available. In most cases, hair loss in anagen effluvium is temporary. Your hair should start to grow back a few months after chemotherapy has stopped. Telogen effluvium Telogen effluvium is a common type of alopecia where there is widespread thinning of the hair, rather than specific bald patches. Your hair may feel thinner, but you're unlikely to lose it all and your other body hair isn't usually affected. Telogen effluvium can be caused by your body reacting to: hormonal changes, such as those that take place when a woman is pregnant intense emotional stress intense physical stress, such as childbirth a short-term illness, such as a severe infection or an operation a long-term illness, such as cancer or liver disease changes in your diet, such as crash dieting some medications, such as anticoagulants (medicines that reduce the ability of your blood to clot) or beta-blockers (used to treat a number of conditions, such as high blood pressure) In most cases of telogen effluvium, your hair will stop falling out and start to grow back within six months. How is hair loss treated? More common types of hair loss, such as male-pattern baldness, don't need treatment because they're a natural part of ageing and don't pose a risk to your health. However, any type of hair loss can be distressing, so you should see your GP if you're worried about it. Your GP should be able to diagnose your type of hair loss by examining your hair. They can also discuss possible treatments with you so it's advisable to visit your GP before trying a private consultant dermatologist (skin care specialist). If you want treatment for male-pattern baldness for cosmetic reasons, two medications called finasteride and minoxidil can be used. Minoxidil can also be used to treat female-pattern baldness. However, these treatments don't work for everyone and only work for as long as they're continued. They are not available on the NHS and can be expensive. Alopecia areata is usually treated with steroid injections, although it's sometimes possible to use a steroid cream, gel or ointment. A treatment called immunotherapy may also be used. This involves stimulating hair growth by causing an intentional allergic reaction in the affected areas of skin. If you have significant hair loss of any type, you may decide to wear a wig. Wigs are available on the NHS, but you may have to pay unless you qualify for help with charges. There are also some surgical options for hair loss, including a hair transplant and artificial hair implants. Read more about treating hair loss. Emotional issues Hair loss can be difficult to come to terms with. The hair on your head can be a defining part of your identity. If you start to lose your hair, it can feel as if you're losing part of your identity. This can affect your self-confidence and sometimes lead to depression. Speak to your GP if you're finding it difficult to deal with your hair loss. They may suggest counselling. You may also benefit from joining a support group or speaking to other people in the same situation \u2013 for example, through online forums. A number of charities, such as Alopecia UK, have support groups and online forums where you can talk to others who are experiencing hair loss. Alopecia Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Alopecia affects hair growth and can lead to permanent hair loss. A dermatologist explains the causes, progression of the condition and treatment options. Media last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Page last reviewed: 07\/01\/2015 Next review due: 07\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 491 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 218  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer and hair loss Chemotherapy Women and hair loss Hair loss myths Wigs and fabric supports External links Alopecia UK: treatments British Association of Dermatologists Macmillan: wigs Community content from HealthUnlocked Hair loss Find out about the different types of hair loss, from male-pattern baldness to alopecia areata Cancer and hair loss Losing your hair is a side effect of some cancer treatments. Here are some tips on how to manage and where to get support Women and hair loss: coping tips Losing your crowning glory can be particularly difficult for women. But there are ways to cope NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Temporal arteritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/giant-cell-arteritis","content":"Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview giant-cell-arteritis Community Giant cell arteritis giant-cell-arteritis Symptoms giant-cell-arteritis Diagnosis giant-cell-arteritis Treatment giant-cell-arteritis Complications Introduction  Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is a condition in which medium and large arteries, usually in the head and neck, become inflamed. It's sometimes called temporal arteritis because the arteries around the temples are usually affected. The condition is one of the most common types of inflammation of the arteries and veins (vasculitis). Symptoms of giant cell arteritis include: aching and soreness in and around the temples jaw muscle pain while eating vision loss These can often develop suddenly, but may follow vague symptoms such as weight loss and prolonged tiredness. Read more about the symptoms of giant cell arteritis. When to see your GP Giant cell arteritis needs urgent medical attention and treatment with steroids. Without prompt treatment it can lead to permanent visual impairment. Contact your GP as soon as possible if you suddenly develop a severe headache, jaw pain when eating, blurred or double vision, or a sore scalp. If this isn't possible, contact your out-of-hours service or call NHS 111. Diagnosis and treatment Treatment for giant cell arteritis will usually begin as soon as possible. This may mean that treatment begins before a diagnosis is confirmed. An examination of your symptoms and blood tests may be carried out if it's thought you have giant cell arteritis. The most effective way to diagnose the condition is to remove some tissue from your temporal artery so it can be studied. This procedure is known as a temporal artery biopsy. The main treatment for giant cell arteritis is steroid medication (corticosteroids). Most people need to take steroids on a long-term basis to prevent their symptoms returning. A two-year course of corticosteroids is usually required. Other types of medication, such as low-dose aspirin and medication that suppresses the immune system (immunosuppressants), may also be used to reduce the risk of the condition recurring and complications developing. Read more about diagnosing giant cell arteritis and treating giant cell arteritis. Complications The damage to the blood vessels in giant cell arteritis can increase the risk of serious problems developing. These include permanent sight loss, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and cardiovascular disease. Read more about the possible complications of giant cell arteritis. Who's affected by giant cell arteritis? In the UK, it's estimated about 1 in every 4,500 people will develop giant cell arteritis each year. It only tends to affect adults over the age of 50, and those who develop the condition are usually over 60. Giant cell arteritis is three times more common in women than in men. It's also seven times more common in white people than in black people. Information about you If you have giant cell arteritis, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Polymyalgia rheumatica Around half of people with giant cell arteritis also develop polymyalgia rheumatic (PMR), a related but less serious condition. Polymyalgia rheumatica causes inflammation of the muscles and sometimes the joints, resulting in symptoms that can include shoulder, neck and hip pain, and stiffness of the affected muscles (which is often most obvious after waking up). The symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica can develop before, after, or at the same time as the symptoms of giant cell arteritis. Page last reviewed: 13\/01\/2015 Next review due: 13\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 482 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 260  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Corticosteroids Polymyalgia rheumatica Visual impairment External links Polymyalgia Rheumatica & Giant Cell Arteritis UK (PMRGCA UK): what is GCA? RNIB: giant cell or temporal arteritis Corticosteroids Corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medicines prescribed to treat a wide range of health conditions Living with low vision Nearly 2 million people in the UK are affected by low vision. But with the right help, your eyesight can be maximised Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Temporomandibular joint disorder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/temporomandibular-joint-disorder","content":"Temporomandibular disorder (TMD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Temporomandibular disorder (TMD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Temporomandibular disorder (TMD) Introduction  Temporomandibular disorder (TMD) is a problem affecting the 'chewing' muscles and the joints between the lower jaw and the base of the skull. Doctors sometimes refer to the condition as \"myofascial pain disorder\". It's been estimated that up to 30% of adults will experience TMD at some point in their lives. The condition itself isn't usually serious, and the symptoms it can cause \u2013 including pain, jaw joint clicking or popping, and difficulties eating \u2013 usually only last a few months before getting better. However, these symptoms can significantly lower quality of life, and specialist treatment might be required if they're severe. What are the symptoms? TMD can cause: clicking, popping or grating noises as you chew or move your mouth muscle pain around the jaw pain in front of the ear that may spread to the cheek, ear and temple difficulty opening the mouth \u2013 the jaw may feel tight, as if it is stuck, making eating difficult headache or migraine earache or a \"buzzing\" or blocked sensation in the ear pain in other areas of the body \u2013 such as neckache or backache These symptoms may lead to related symptoms, such as disturbed sleep. What are the causes? Possible causes of TMD include: clenching your jaw or grinding your teeth during sleep (bruxism) \u2013 which overworks the jaw muscles and puts pressure on the joint (often caused by stress) wear and tear of the inside of the jaw joint \u2013 usually caused by osteoarthritis injury to the jaw joint \u2013 for example, after a blow to the face or surgery stress \u2013 some people may inherit increased sensitivity to pain or stress uneven bite \u2013 for example, when new fillings, dental crowns or dentures are fitted specific diseases \u2013 TMD may be associated with specific diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, gout or fibromyalgia However, some people may develop TMD without an obvious cause being found. How is TMD treated? If you have TMD, see your GP or dentist first for diagnosis and to discuss treatment options. Generally, non-surgical treatments such as lifestyle changes and self-help physiotherapy-type treatments are tried first. A small number of people with severe TMD may be referred to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon to discuss further treatment options. Lifestyle changes There are a number of self-help measures that can help improve TMD, including: resting the joint by eating soft food and avoiding chewing gum holding a warm or cold flannel to the jaw for 10-20 minutes, several times a day doing a few gentle jaw-stretching exercises \u2013 your healthcare professional can recommend appropriate exercises avoiding opening the joint too wide until the pain settles avoiding clenching the teeth for long periods of time massaging the muscles around the joint relaxation techniques to relieve stress not resting your chin on your hand Mouth guards Mouth guards (plastic devices that fit over your teeth) may be helpful if you grind your teeth. These cover the teeth at night to reduce jaw clenching and teeth grinding, and can be made to measure by your dentist. Read more about treatments for teeth grinding. Medication Painkillers such as paracetamol, ibuprofen or codeine can help relieve the pain associated with TMD. If these aren't enough to control the pain, your doctor may prescribe stronger medication such as a muscle relaxant or antidepressant. Steroid injections If TMD is caused by a disease such as arthritis, a steroid injection into the jaw joint can help reduce pain and swelling in a joint or the surrounding soft tissue. Most people report feeling less pain within the first 24 hours to one week. You may find your pain improves for a period of a few weeks to several months and, in some cases, the injection resolves the pain completely. Read more about corticosteroids (steroids). Surgery If the above measures don't help and the source of your symptoms is the temporomandibular joint \u2013 rather than the chewing muscles \u2013 your specialist may suggest a surgical treatment such as arthrocentesis (joint wash-out). Open joint surgery may be considered in the rare cases where there is an abnormality within the joint. Total joint replacement may be recommended for an extremely small number of people with severe, long-lasting symptoms and impaired jaw function. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has produced guidelines on this procedure. Read the NICE 2009 guidelines on artificial total temporomandibular joint replacement. All joint surgery can have significant side effects and you should discuss these with your surgeon. Outlook Most cases of TMD improve over time and do not get worse, and most people will not need surgery. In the meantime, symptoms can often be improved with the treatments mentioned above. Although not a serious condition, temporomandibular disorder can make a significant impact on quality of life  Community content from HealthUnlocked Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice Page last reviewed: 21\/08\/2014 Next review due: 21\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1126 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 584  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 303  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Find an NHS dentist Osteoarthritis Rheumatoid arthritis Teeth grinding Tension-type headaches External links The British Dental Health Foundation The British Pain Society The Migraine Trust: jaw tension factsheet NICE 2009 guidelines: TM joint replacement British Orthodontic Society: your jaw surgery Pain Concern Breathing exercise for stress This calming breathing technique for stress, anxiety and panic takes just a few minutes and can be done anywhere 10 stress busters Stress-beating tips that really help, including being more active and taking time out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tendon repair, hand","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tendonhand","content":"Hand tendon repair - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hand tendon repair  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Hand tendon repair tendonhand How it's performed tendonhand Recovery tendonhand Complications Introduction  If any of the tendons in your hand are damaged, surgery may be needed to repair them and help restore movement in the affected fingers or thumb. What are tendons? Tendons are tough cords of tissue that connect muscles to bones. When a group of muscles contract (tighten), the attached tendons will pull on certain bones, allowing you to make a wide range of movements. There are two groups of tendons in the hand: extensor tendons \u2013 which run from the forearm, across the back of your hand to your fingers and thumb, allowing you to straighten your fingers and thumb flexor tendons \u2013 which run from your forearm, through your wrist and across the palm of your hand, allowing you to bend your fingers Surgery can often be carried out to repair damage to both these groups of tendons. When hand tendon repair is needed Hand tendon repair is carried out when one or more tendons in your hand rupture or are cut, leading to loss of normal hand movements. If your extensor tendons are damaged, you'll be unable to straighten one or more fingers. If your flexor tendons are damaged, you'll be unable to bend one or more fingers. Tendon damage can also cause pain and inflammation (swelling) in your hand. In some cases, damage to the extensor tendons can be treated without the need for surgery, using a rigid support called a splint that\u2019s worn around the hand. Common causes of tendon injuries include: cuts \u2013 cuts across the back or palm of your hand can result in injury to your tendons  sports injuries \u2013 extensor tendons can rupture when stubbing a finger, such as trying to catch a ball; flexor tendons can occasionally be pulled off the bone when grabbing an opponent's jersey, such as in rugby; and the pulleys holding flexor tendons can rupture during activities that involve lots of strenuous gripping, such as rock climbing bites \u2013 animal and human bites can cause tendon damage, and a person may damage their hand tendon after punching another person in the teeth crushing injuries \u2013 jamming a finger in a door or crushing the hand in a car accident can divide or rupture a tendon  rheumatoid arthritis \u2013 rheumatoid arthritis can cause tendons to become inflamed, which in severe cases can lead to tendons rupturing Tendon repair surgery Tendon repair may involve the surgeon making an incision in your wrist, hand or finger so they can locate the ends of the divided tendon and stitch them together. Extensor tendons are easier to reach, so repairing them is relatively straightforward. Depending on the type of injury, it may be possible to repair extensor tendons in an accident and emergency (A&E) department using a local anaesthetic to numb the affected area. Repairing flexor tendons is more challenging because the flexor tendon system is more complex. Flexor tendon repair usually needs to be carried out under either general anaesthetic or regional anaesthetic (where the whole arm is numbed) in an operating theatre by an experienced plastic or orthopaedic surgeon who specialises in hand surgery. Read more about how hand tendon repair is performed. Recovering from surgery Both types of tendon surgery require a lengthy period of recovery (rehabilitation) because the repaired tendons will be weak until the ends heal together. Depending on the location of the injury, it can take up to three months for the repaired tendon to regain its previous strength. Rehabilitation involves protecting your tendons from overuse using a hand splint. You'll usually need to wear a hand splint for several weeks after surgery. You'll also need to perform hand exercises regularly during your recovery to stop the repaired tendons sticking to nearby tissue, which can prevent you from being able to fully move your hand. When you can return to work will depend on your job. Light activities can often be resumed after 6-8 weeks and heavy activities and sport after 10-12 weeks. Read more about recovering from hand tendon repair. Results After an extensor tendon repair you should have a working finger or thumb, but you may not regain full movement. The outcome is often better when the injury is a clean cut to the tendon, rather than one that involves crushing or damage to the bones and joints. A flexor tendon injury is generally more serious because they're often put under more strain than extensor tendons. After a flexor tendon repair, it's quite common for some fingers to not regain full movement. However, the tendon repair will still give a better result than not having surgery. In some cases, complications develop after surgery, such as infection or the repaired tendon snapping or sticking to nearby tissue. In these circumstances, further treatment may be required. Read more about the complications of hand tendon repair. Page last reviewed: 07\/07\/2015 Next review due: 07\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 153 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links First aid Having an operation Human and animal bites Rheumatoid arthritis Sports injuries Trigger finger External links BSSH: hand surgery Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Questions about surgery It's important to know the details of any operation you're going to have. Find out what you should ask before having surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tendonitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tendonitis","content":"Tendonitis and other tendon injuries - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tendonitis and other tendon injuries  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tendonitis Clinical trials Tendonitis Tendonitis Symptoms Tendonitis Treatment Introduction  Tendons are strong bands or cords of tissue that attach muscle to bone. They help move the bones and joints when muscles contract.  The main types of tendon injury are: tendonitis \u2013 inflammation of a tendon tendinopathy \u2013 the gradual deterioration of a tendon tenosynovitis \u2013 inflammation of the protective sheath that surrounds a tendon tendon rupture \u2013 a sudden tear in a tendon Tendon injuries usually happen during sports or activities that involve sudden, sharp movements, such as throwing or jumping, or after repeated overuse of the tendons, such as running. They can also be caused by repetitive daily activities, such as regularly using a computer keyboard and mouse. This is known as a repetitive strain injury (RSI). Symptoms of a tendon injury Tendon injuries can affect many different parts of the body. Commonly affected areas include the shoulders, elbows, wrists, knees, fingers and backs of the heels. Symptoms of a tendon injury can include: pain that gets worse when you move the affected area stiffness in the affected area, which may be worse in the morning weakness in the affected area or being unable to move a joint a sensation that the tendon is grating or crackling as it moves swelling, sometimes with heat or redness a lump on the affected tendon If your tendon ruptures, you will usually experience sudden and severe pain, which may eventually settle into a continuous, dull ache or no pain at all. Movement in the affected area may also become more difficult or even impossible. Read more about the symptoms of tendon injuries. When to see your GP Minor tendon injuries can often be treated at home (see below). They will usually get better in a few weeks. See your GP if your symptoms are severe or don't start to improve within a few weeks, or if you think you may have ruptured a tendon. Your GP will usually be able to diagnose a tendon injury by asking about your symptoms and examining the affected area. Occasionally, they may request an X-ray, ultrasound scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan to confirm the diagnosis. Some medications may be related to tendon injuries, such as fluoroquinolone antibiotics and statins, so your GP may stop these if you\u2019re taking them. Treating tendon injuries If you think you have injured a tendon, stop doing the exercise or activity that caused your symptoms and rest the affected area initially. As your symptoms start to improve, you can gradually return to your normal activities. In the meantime, taking paracetamol or ibuprofen and applying an ice pack or bag of frozen vegetables wrapped in a towel to the affected area may help relieve your pain. For more persistent injuries, your GP may be able to refer you for treatments such as physiotherapy, corticosteroid injections or shock wave therapy. In some cases, surgery may be recommended to treat long-term injuries that have not improved following other treatments, or to repair a ruptured tendon. Read more about treating tendon injuries. Preventing tendon injuries You can help reduce your risk of tendon injuries by: warming up before playing sport or exercising, and cooling down afterwards \u2013 read about how to warm up before exercising and how to stretch after exercising making sure you use the correct equipment for the activity you're doing, such as wearing appropriate footwear getting specialist coaching or training to help improve your technique in a particular sport not exerting yourself beyond your physical capability exercising the affected area to stretch and strengthen it \u2013 a physiotherapist may be able to advise you about the best exercises to do avoiding repetitive movements when possible and make sure you take regular breaks ensuring your desk, keyboard and mouse are in a comfortable position \u2013 read more about preventing RSI If your job involves repetitive movements, ask your employer to provide rest periods, devices to support your wrists, and help with your posture. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/03\/2015 Next review due: 09\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 707 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 322  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 210  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Tendonitis: an animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Tendonitis is a painful condition caused by swollen or injured tendons in the body. This animation explains the condition in detail. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Pain after exercise Physiotherapy Sports injuries Strength and flexibility External links CSP: find a physio NICE: ESWT for Achilles tendinopathy NICE: ESWT for calcific tendonitis NICE: ESWT for tennis elbow The Pain Toolkit Sports injuries Read about what you can do to treat and prevent sports injuries, and when you should seek medical advice Find and choose services for tendon injuries Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tennis elbow","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tennis-elbow","content":"Tennis elbow - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tennis elbow  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tennis-elbow Clinical trials Tennis elbow Tennis-elbow Symptoms Tennis-elbow Causes Tennis-elbow Treatment Tennis-elbow Prevention Introduction  Tennis elbow is a condition that causes pain around the outside of the elbow. It's clinically known as lateral epicondylitis. It often occurs after strenuous overuse of the muscles and tendons of the forearm, near the elbow joint. You may notice pain: on the outside of your upper forearm, just below the bend of your elbow when lifting or bending your arm when gripping small objects, such as a pen when twisting your forearm, such as turning a door handle or opening a jar You may also find it difficult to fully extend your arm. Read more about the symptoms of tennis elbow. What causes tennis elbow? The elbow joint is surrounded by muscles that move your elbow, wrist and fingers. The tendons in your elbow join the bones and muscles together, and control the muscles of your forearm. Tennis elbow is usually caused by overusing the muscles attached to your elbow and used to straighten your wrist. If the muscles and tendons are strained, tiny tears and inflammation can develop near the bony lump (the lateral epicondyle) on the outside of your elbow. As the name suggests, tennis elbow is sometimes caused by playing tennis. However, it is often caused by other activities that place repeated stress on the elbow joint, such as decorating or playing the violin. Pain that occurs on the inner side of the elbow is often known as golfer's elbow. Read more about the causes of tennis elbow. When to see your GP If your elbow pain is caused by a strenuous or repetitive activity, you should avoid the activity until your symptoms improve.  Visit your GP if the pain in your elbow persists, despite resting it for a few days. They will check for swelling and tenderness, and carry out some simple tests, such as asking you to extend your fingers and flex your wrist with your elbow extended. Further tests, such as an ultrasound scan or a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan will only be needed if it is thought that your pain is being caused by nerve damage. Treating tennis elbow Tennis elbow is a self-limiting condition, which means it will eventually get better without treatment. However, there are treatments that can be used to improve your symptoms and speed up your recovery. It's important that you rest your injured arm and stop doing the activity that's causing the problem. Holding a cold compress, such as a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a towel, against your elbow for a few minutes several times a day can help ease the pain. Taking painkillers, such as paracetamol, may help reduce mild pain caused by tennis elbow. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, can also be used to help reduce inflammation. Physiotherapy may be recommended in more severe and persistent cases. Massaging and manipulating the affected area may help relieve the pain and stiffness, and improve the range of movement in your arm. Surgery may be used as a last resort to remove the damaged part of the tendon. Most cases of tennis elbow last between six months and two years. However, in about nine out of 10 cases, a full recovery is made within a year. Read more about how tennis elbow is treated. Preventing tennis elbow It's not always easy to avoid getting tennis elbow, although not putting too much stress on the muscles and tendons surrounding your elbow will help prevent the condition getting worse. If your tennis elbow is caused by an activity that involves placing repeated strain on your elbow joint, such as tennis, changing your technique may alleviate the problem. Read more advice about preventing tennis elbow.  Tennis elbow is pain on the outside of the elbow  Who is affected by tennis elbow? Tennis elbow is a common musculoskeletal condition. It's estimated that as many as one in three people have tennis elbow at any given time. Each year in the UK, about five in every 1,000 people go to see their GP about tennis elbow. The condition usually affects adults and is more common in people who are 40-60 years of age. Men and women are equally affected. Sports injuries Read about what you can do to treat and prevent sports injuries, and when you should seek medical advice Page last reviewed: 27\/09\/2014 Next review due: 27\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1202 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 626  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 366  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 103  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bursitis Living with pain Running injuries Sports injuries Tendonitis External links Arthritis Research UK: elbow conditions CSP: sport-specific warm up advice Tips to prevent RSI Prevent repetitive strain injury (RSI), with tips on relaxation, checking your workstation, and adjusting your computer Find and choose services for Tennis elbow Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tenosynovitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tendonitis","content":"Tendonitis and other tendon injuries - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tendonitis and other tendon injuries  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tendonitis Clinical trials Tendonitis Tendonitis Symptoms Tendonitis Treatment Introduction  Tendons are strong bands or cords of tissue that attach muscle to bone. They help move the bones and joints when muscles contract.  The main types of tendon injury are: tendonitis \u2013 inflammation of a tendon tendinopathy \u2013 the gradual deterioration of a tendon tenosynovitis \u2013 inflammation of the protective sheath that surrounds a tendon tendon rupture \u2013 a sudden tear in a tendon Tendon injuries usually happen during sports or activities that involve sudden, sharp movements, such as throwing or jumping, or after repeated overuse of the tendons, such as running. They can also be caused by repetitive daily activities, such as regularly using a computer keyboard and mouse. This is known as a repetitive strain injury (RSI). Symptoms of a tendon injury Tendon injuries can affect many different parts of the body. Commonly affected areas include the shoulders, elbows, wrists, knees, fingers and backs of the heels. Symptoms of a tendon injury can include: pain that gets worse when you move the affected area stiffness in the affected area, which may be worse in the morning weakness in the affected area or being unable to move a joint a sensation that the tendon is grating or crackling as it moves swelling, sometimes with heat or redness a lump on the affected tendon If your tendon ruptures, you will usually experience sudden and severe pain, which may eventually settle into a continuous, dull ache or no pain at all. Movement in the affected area may also become more difficult or even impossible. Read more about the symptoms of tendon injuries. When to see your GP Minor tendon injuries can often be treated at home (see below). They will usually get better in a few weeks. See your GP if your symptoms are severe or don't start to improve within a few weeks, or if you think you may have ruptured a tendon. Your GP will usually be able to diagnose a tendon injury by asking about your symptoms and examining the affected area. Occasionally, they may request an X-ray, ultrasound scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan to confirm the diagnosis. Some medications may be related to tendon injuries, such as fluoroquinolone antibiotics and statins, so your GP may stop these if you\u2019re taking them. Treating tendon injuries If you think you have injured a tendon, stop doing the exercise or activity that caused your symptoms and rest the affected area initially. As your symptoms start to improve, you can gradually return to your normal activities. In the meantime, taking paracetamol or ibuprofen and applying an ice pack or bag of frozen vegetables wrapped in a towel to the affected area may help relieve your pain. For more persistent injuries, your GP may be able to refer you for treatments such as physiotherapy, corticosteroid injections or shock wave therapy. In some cases, surgery may be recommended to treat long-term injuries that have not improved following other treatments, or to repair a ruptured tendon. Read more about treating tendon injuries. Preventing tendon injuries You can help reduce your risk of tendon injuries by: warming up before playing sport or exercising, and cooling down afterwards \u2013 read about how to warm up before exercising and how to stretch after exercising making sure you use the correct equipment for the activity you're doing, such as wearing appropriate footwear getting specialist coaching or training to help improve your technique in a particular sport not exerting yourself beyond your physical capability exercising the affected area to stretch and strengthen it \u2013 a physiotherapist may be able to advise you about the best exercises to do avoiding repetitive movements when possible and make sure you take regular breaks ensuring your desk, keyboard and mouse are in a comfortable position \u2013 read more about preventing RSI If your job involves repetitive movements, ask your employer to provide rest periods, devices to support your wrists, and help with your posture. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/03\/2015 Next review due: 09\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 707 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 322  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 210  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Tendonitis: an animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Tendonitis is a painful condition caused by swollen or injured tendons in the body. This animation explains the condition in detail. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Pain after exercise Physiotherapy Sports injuries Strength and flexibility External links CSP: find a physio NICE: ESWT for Achilles tendinopathy NICE: ESWT for calcific tendonitis NICE: ESWT for tennis elbow The Pain Toolkit Sports injuries Read about what you can do to treat and prevent sports injuries, and when you should seek medical advice Find and choose services for tendon injuries Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tens","content":"TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation)   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview tens Clinical trials TENS Introduction  Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is a method of pain relief involving the use of a mild electrical current. A TENS machine is a small, battery-operated device that has leads connected to sticky pads called electrodes. You attach the pads directly to your skin. When the machine is switched on, small electrical impulses are delivered to the affected area of your body, which you feel as a tingling sensation. The electrical impulses can reduce the pain signals going to the spinal cord and brain, which may help relieve pain and relax muscles. They may also stimulate the production of endorphins, which are the body's natural painkillers. What TENS is used for TENS may be able to help reduce pain and muscle spasms caused by a wide range of conditions including: arthritis period pain knee pain neck pain back pain sports injuries It's also sometimes used as a method of pain relief during labour. Does TENS work? There isn't enough good-quality scientific evidence to say for sure whether TENS is a reliable method of pain relief. More research is needed and clinical trials for TENS are ongoing. Healthcare professionals have reported that it seems to help some people, although how well it works depends on the individual and the condition being treated. TENS isn't a cure for pain and often only provides short-term relief while the TENS machine is being used. However, the treatment is generally very safe and you may feel it's worth trying instead of, or in addition to, the usual medical treatments. Trying TENS If you're thinking about trying TENS, it's a good idea to speak to your GP about a referral to a physiotherapist or pain clinic. A physiotherapist or pain specialist may be able to loan you a TENS machine for a short period if they think it could help. You can choose to buy your own TENS machine without getting medical advice, but it's generally better to have a proper assessment first, so you can find out whether a TENS machine is appropriate for you and be taught how to use it properly. To get the most benefit from TENS, it's important that the settings are adjusted correctly for you and your individual condition. If you find TENS effective, you can buy a TENS machine from a pharmacy. They range in price from about £10 to £200. More expensive machines aren't necessarily any better than lower-priced ones, so it's best to do some research before you buy. How to use TENS The information below is a general guide on how to use a TENS machine. You should always follow the manufacturer's specific instructions. TENS machines are small and lightweight, so you can use them while you're working or on the move. You can put it in your pocket, clip it to your belt or hold it in your hand. You can use TENS throughout the day for as long as you like, although it shouldn't be used while you're driving, operating machinery, or in the bath or shower.  Positioning the pads Make sure the machine is switched off before you attach the pads to your skin. Position the pads either side of the painful area, at least 2.5cm (1 inch) apart. Never place the pads over: the front or sides of your neck your temples your mouth or eyes your chest and upper back at the same time irritated, infected or broken skin varicose veins  numb areas Turning it on and adjusting the strength Turn on the TENS machine when the pads are attached in the correct places. You'll feel a slight tingling sensation pass through your skin. The machine has a dial that allows you to control the strength of the electrical impulses. Start on a low setting and gradually increase it until the sensation feels strong but comfortable. If the tingling sensation starts to feel painful or uncomfortable, reduce it slightly. Switch the TENS machine off after you've finished using it and remove the electrodes from your skin. Are there any risks of side effects? For most people, TENS is a safe treatment with no side effects. Some people may be allergic to the pads and their skin may become red and irritated, but special pads for people with allergies are available. TENS isn't safe for everyone to use. Don't use it without first seeking medical advice if: you have a pacemaker or another type of electrical or metal implant in your body you're pregnant, or there's a chance you might be pregnant \u2013 TENS may not be recommended early in pregnancy you have epilepsy or a heart problem Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 06\/10\/2015 Next review due: 06\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 345 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 157  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 117  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Back pain Neck pain Physiotherapy Sports injuries External links Action on Pain Pain Concern Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain Physiotherapy Find out how physiotherapy can help promote healing and wellbeing NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tension-type headaches","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/headaches-tension-type","content":"Tension-type headaches - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tension-type headaches  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview headaches-tension-type Clinical trials Tension-type headaches Introduction  A tension-type headache is the most common type of headache and the one we think of as a normal, everyday headache.  It may feel like a constant ache that affects both sides of the head. You may also feel the neck muscles tighten and a feeling of pressure behind the eyes. A tension headache normally won't be severe enough to prevent you doing everyday activities. It usually lasts for 30 minutes to several hours, but can last for several days. Who gets tension headaches? Most people are likely to have experienced a tension headache at some point. They can develop at any age, but are more common in teenagers and adults. Women tend to suffer from them more commonly than men. It's estimated that about half the adults in the UK experience tension-type headaches once or twice a month, and about 1 in 3 get them up to 15 times a month. About 2 or 3 in every 100 adults experience tension-type headaches more than 15 times a month for at least three months in a row. This is known as having chronic tension-type headaches. When to seek medical help There's usually no need to see your GP if you only get occasional headaches. However, see your GP if you get headaches several times a week or your headaches are severe. Your GP will ask questions about your headaches, family history, diet and lifestyle to help diagnose the type of headache you have. You should seek immediate medical advice for headaches that: come on suddenly and are unlike anything you've had before are accompanied by a very stiff neck, fever, nausea, vomiting and confusion follow an accident, especially if it involved a blow to your head are accompanied by weakness, numbness, slurred speech or confusion These symptoms suggest there could be a more serious problem, which may require further investigation and emergency treatment. What causes tension headaches? The exact cause of tension-type headaches isn't clear, but certain things have been known to trigger them, including: stress and anxiety squinting poor posture tiredness dehydration missing meals lack of physical activity bright sunlight noise certain smells Tension-type headaches are known as primary headaches, which means they're not caused by an underlying condition. Other primary headaches include cluster headaches and migraines. How are tension headaches treated? Tension-type headaches aren't life-threatening and are usually relieved by painkillers or lifestyle changes. Lifestyle changes Relaxation techniques can often help with stress-related headaches. This may include: yoga massage exercise applying a hot flannel to your forehead and neck Read more about relaxation tips to help with stress. Painkillers Painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen can be used to help relieve pain. Aspirin may also sometimes be recommended. If you're taking these medications, you should always follow the instructions on the packet. Pregnant women shouldn't take ibuprofen during the third trimester, as it could risk harming the baby, and children under 16 shouldn't be given aspirin. Medication shouldn't be taken for more than a few days at a time and medication containing codeine, such as co-codamol, should be avoided unless recommended by a GP. Painkiller headaches Taking painkillers over a long period (usually 10 days or more) may lead to medication-overuse headaches developing. Your body can get used to the medication and a headache can develop if you stop taking them.  If your GP suspects your headache is caused by the persistent use of medication, they may ask you to stop taking it. However, you shouldn't stop taking your medication without first consulting your GP. Read more about painkiller headaches. Preventing tension headaches If you experience frequent tension-type headaches, you may wish to keep a diary to try to identify what could be triggering them. It may then be possible to alter your diet or lifestyle to prevent them occurring as often. Regular exercise and relaxation are also important measures to help reduce stress and tension that may be causing headaches. Maintaining good posture and ensuring you're well rested and hydrated can also help. Guidelines from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) states that a course of up to 10 sessions of acupuncture over a 5-8 week period may be beneficial in preventing chronic tension-type headaches. In some cases, an antidepressant medication called amitriptyline may be prescribed to help prevent chronic tension-type headaches, although there's limited evidence of its effectiveness. This medication doesn't treat a headache instantly, but must be taken daily for several months until the headaches lessen. Page last reviewed: 07\/08\/2015 Next review due: 07\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 383 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 171  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Headaches Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Dr Anne MacGregor describes common causes of headaches, the differences between a normal headache and more severe forms such as a migraine, and treatment options. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Headaches Cluster headaches Migraine Painkiller headaches Find headache services External links Pain Concern Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice 10 headache triggers 10 headache triggers plus practical advice on how to avoid them Breathing exercise for stress This calming breathing technique for stress, anxiety and panic takes just a few minutes and can be done anywhere Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Termination of pregnancy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Abortion","content":"Abortion - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Abortion  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Abortion Clinical trials Abortion Abortion What happens Abortion Risks   An abortion is the medical process of ending a pregnancy so it doesn't result in the birth of a baby. It's also sometimes known as a termination. The pregnancy is ended either by taking medications or having a minor surgical procedure. One in three women will have an abortion in their lifetime. This page covers: How to get an abortion When it can be done Making a decision What happens Risks of an abortion How to get an abortion Abortions can only be carried out in an NHS hospital or a licensed clinic, and are usually available free of charge on the NHS. There are three main ways to get an abortion on the NHS: contact an abortion provider directly \u2013 the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS), Marie Stopes UK and the National Unplanned Pregnancy Advisory Service (NUPAS) can tell you about eligibility and services in your area speak to your GP and ask for a referral to an abortion service \u2013 your GP should refer you to another doctor if he or she has any objections to abortion visit a contraception clinic, family planning clinic, sexual health clinic or genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic and ask for a referral to an abortion service Waiting times can vary, but you shouldn't have to wait more than two weeks from your initial appointment to having an abortion. Abortions can also be paid for privately if you prefer. Costs for private abortions vary depending on the stage of pregnancy and the method used to carry out the procedure. When an abortion can be carried out Most abortions in England, Wales and Scotland are carried out before 24 weeks of pregnancy. They can be carried out after 24 weeks in certain circumstances \u2013 for example, if the mother's life is at risk or the child would be born with a severe disability. The length of your pregnancy is calculated from the first day of your last period. If you're not sure how long you've been pregnant, you may need an ultrasound scan to check. Abortions are simpler and safer the earlier they're carried out. Getting advice early on will give you more time to make a decision if you're unsure. Deciding to have an abortion Some women may be certain they want to have an abortion, while others may find it more difficult to make a decision. The decision to have an abortion is yours alone. But all women requesting an abortion should be offered the opportunity to discuss their options and choices with, and receive support from, a trained pregnancy counsellor. Impartial information and support is available from: your GP or another doctor at your GP practice a counselling service at the abortion clinic organisations such as the FPA, Brook (for under-25s), BPAS, Marie Stopes UK and NUPAS \u2013 but beware of so-called \"crisis pregnancy centres\" that claim to provide impartial advice but often do not You may also want to speak to your partner, friends or family, but you don't need to discuss it with anyone else and they don't have a say in the final decision. If you don't want to tell anyone, your details will be kept confidential. If you're under 16, your parents don't usually need to be told. Information about an abortion doesn't go on your medical record.  What happens during an abortion Before having an abortion, you'll attend an appointment to talk about your decision and what happens next. Whenever possible, you should be given a choice of how you would like the abortion to be carried out. There are two options: medical abortion (the \"abortion pill\") \u2013 you take two medications, usually 24 to 48 hours apart, to induce a miscarriage surgical abortion \u2013 you have a minor procedure to remove the pregnancy and normally go home soon afterwards After an abortion, you'll probably need to take things easy for a few days. It's likely you'll experience some discomfort and vaginal bleeding for up to two weeks. Read more about how an abortion is carried out. Risks of an abortion Abortions are safest if they're carried out as early as possible in pregnancy. Most women won't experience any problems, but there is a small risk of complications, such as: infection of the womb \u2013 occurs in up to 1 in every 10 abortions some of the pregnancy remaining in the womb \u2013 occurs in up to 1 in every 20 abortions excessive bleeding \u2013 occurs in about 1 in every 1,000 abortions damage to the entrance of the womb (cervix) \u2013 occurs in up to 1 in every 100 surgical abortions damage to the womb \u2013 occurs in 1 in every 250 to 1,000 surgical abortions and less than 1 in 1,000 medical abortions carried out at 12 to 24 weeks If complications do occur, further treatment \u2013 including surgery \u2013 may be required. Having an abortion won't affect your chances of becoming pregnant again and having normal pregnancies in the future. In fact, you may be able to get pregnant immediately afterwards and should use contraception if you want to avoid this. Read more about the risks of abortion. Page last reviewed: 17\/08\/2016 Next review due: 17\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1194 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 413  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 109  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 534  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Abortion for foetal abnormality Emergency contraception External links British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) Brook: advice for under-25s FPA Marie Stopes UK National Unplanned Pregnancy Advisory Service (NUPAS) Need help now? Where to get sexual health help urgently, including advice about what to do after unprotected sex or sexual assault Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Terry's nails","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nail-abnormalities","content":"Nail abnormalities - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nail abnormalities  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Fingernail or toenail abnormalities can tell you a lot about your health. They're often a sign of a fungal nail infection or injury, but can sometimes indicate a more serious underlying disease. Visit your GP if your nails have changed in colour, texture, shape or thickness and you don't know why (you haven't injured your nails or been biting them). This guide gives the most likely reasons for the following nail problems: brittle or crumbly nails  discoloured nails  white nails  thickened, overgrown nails  loose nails  indented spoon-shaped nails  pitting or dents on the nails  grooves going across the width of the nails  unusually curved fingertips and nails  white lines running across the nails  dark stripes running down the nail  red or brown little streaks under the nails  a destroyed nail  infected nail fold (painful, red and swollen skin next to the nail) Brittle or crumbly nails Brittle nails are often just a sign of ageing or long-term exposure to water or chemicals such as detergents and nail polish. Nails can be strengthened by taking biotin (vitamin B7) supplements, by wearing gloves for all wet work and by frequently applying moisturising cream to the nails. Sometimes, brittle or crumbly nails can be caused by: a fungal nail infection, which can be cleared by taking a course of antifungal tablets (this especially tends to be the cause for crumbly toenails) a skin condition called lichen planus, which can just affect the nails an underactive thyroid or overactive thyroid, where the thyroid gland either doesn't produce enough hormones or produces too many nail psoriasis, a long-term skin condition that can cause the nails to become crumbly A less common cause of crumbly nails is reactive arthritis, an unusual reaction of the immune system affecting the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection. If you have a combination of symptoms affecting different parts of your body, your GP might consider this condition. Discoloured nails The most common causes of a yellow nail are fungal nail infections or nail psoriasis. Yellow nails can also result from any of the following: frequent application of nail varnish lymphoedema, a long-term condition that causes swelling of the skin permanent damage to your airways caused by bronchiectasis (a long-term lung condition) sinusitis (inflammation of the lining of the sinuses) inflammation of the thyroid gland, found in the neck tuberculosis (TB), a bacterial infection affecting the lungs jaundice (yellowing of the skin) due to liver disease some drugs, such as mepacrine or carotene   chronic paronychia (infection of the nail fold) Green-black nails can be caused by overgrowth of bacteria called pseudomonas, especially under loose nails. This can be treated by applying antibiotic eye drops underneath the nails or soaking the affected nails in an antiseptic solution or vinegar. Grey nails can be caused by medication such as antimalarials or minocycline. Brown nails can sometimes be caused by thyroid disease, pregnancy, malnutrition and frequent use of nail varnish. Red or yellow drop under the nail If the discolouration looks like a drop of oil under the nail plate or is the colour of salmon, you may have psoriasis of the nails. Half white, half brown nails Fingernails that are half white and half brown (brown near the tips) can be a sign of kidney failure, where the kidneys stop working properly. The link is not fully understood, but one theory is that kidney failure causes chemical changes in the blood that encourage melanin (a skin pigment) to be released into the nail bed. It's also possible that kidney failure causes an increase in the number of tiny blood vessels in the nail bed. It's estimated up to 40% of people with kidney failure have \"half-and-half\" fingernails. Half-and-half nails have also been seen in some people with AIDS and can be seen following chemotherapy. White nails If most of the nail plate has turned white and it's not because the nail has become detached from the nail bed, it's likely to be either a fungal nail infection or a sign of decreased blood supply to the nail bed, known as \"Terry's nails\". Terry's nails are typically white with reddened or dark tips and can be a sign of a wide range of medical conditions, including the following: liver cirrhosis (scarring and damage to the liver) \u2013 about 80% of people with cirrhosis have Terry's nails liver, kidney or heart failure diabetes iron-deficiency anaemia \u2013 a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body chemotherapy an overactive thyroid (where the thyroid gland in your neck produces too many hormones) malnutrition  Thickened, overgrown nails A common cause of thickened nails is a fungal nail infection. This can also cause them to discolour and become crumbly (see above). Other possible causes of thickened or overgrown nails are: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin long-term pressure from shoes that are either too small or too narrow over the toes reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection Severely overgrown horn-like nails Sometimes, the big toenails become so overgrown and thickened that they resemble claws and are almost impossible to cut with conventional nail clippers. This nail disorder is known as onychogryphosis (\"ram's horn nails\"), and is seen in older people or as a response to long-term pressure on the nails. Regular chiropody can help, but sometimes the nails need to be removed by a podiatrist or doctor. Loose nails It's normal for a toenail to come loose and fall off after an injury to the toe. However, if you haven't injured your nail, a loose nail is often caused by over-manicuring the nails and cleaning under the nails with a sharp object. Less commonly, it may be a sign of one of the following health conditions: a fungal nail infection psoriasis of the nail \u2013 psoriasis is a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin warts that cluster around the fingernail an overactive thyroid, which means the thyroid gland in the neck is producing too many hormones  sarcoidosis, a condition where small clumps of cells form in the organs and tissues of the body amyloidosis, where protein builds up in the organs a problem with the connective tissue fibres in the body that support the organs and body tissues poor circulation, for example caused by smoking or Raynaud's disease  an allergic reaction to medicine (usually to a type of antibiotic) or nail cosmetics A loose nail should be cut back to where it's detached to allow the nail to become reattached as it grows. You shouldn't clean your nails with anything other than a soft nailbrush. Indented spoon-shaped nails (koilonychia) If your fingernails curve inwards like spoons (known medically as koilonychia), you may have one of the following disorders: iron-deficiency anaemia, which is a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body haemochromatosis, where the body contains too much iron Raynaud\u2019s disease, a common condition affecting the blood supply to the fingers and toes, causing them to turn white  lupus erythematosus, an uncommon condition where the immune system attacks the body's cells, tissues and organs Pitting or dents on the nails Pitting or small dents on the surface of your nails can be a sign of any of the following diseases: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin (10%-50% of patients with psoriasis have pitted nails) eczema, a long-term skin condition reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection alopecia areata, patches of hair loss that tend to come and go Grooves across the fingernails (Beau's lines) Deep lines or grooves that go from left to right across the nail are known as Beau's lines. They may be a sign of: a previous illness \u2013 the line forms at the time of the illness  chemotherapy a previous injury previous exposure to extremely cold temperatures, if you have Raynaud's disease Illness, injury or cold temperatures can interrupt nail growth and cause nail grooves to form at the base of the nails. These grooves tend to only be noticed a few months later, when the nails have grown and the grooves have moved up the nails to become visible. It takes about four to six months for a fingernail to fully grow out, and 6-12 months for a toenail. Unusually curved fingertips and nails Clubbing of the fingertips means the tissue beneath the nails thickens and the fingertips become rounded and bulbous. The fingernails curve over the rounded fingertips. Clubbing is thought to result from increased blood flow to the fingertips. It can run in families and be entirely harmless. However, if it suddenly develops, it may be a sign of one of many possible medical conditions, including: long-term lung disease or heart disease, such as lung cancer, bronchiectasis, or endocarditis inflammatory bowel disease, a long-term disease that causes inflammation of the lining of the gut stomach cancer or bowel cancer cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) polycythaemia, a condition where the blood is too thick  White lines running across nails White spots or streaks are normal and nothing to worry about, but parallel white lines that extend all the way across the nails, known as Muehrcke's lines, are a sign of low levels of protein in the blood. In contrast to Beau's lines (see above), they're not grooved. They can be due to liver disease or malnutrition. Dark stripes running down the nail If you have dark skin, it's fairly common to find dark stripes running down your nails (linear melanonychia). This occurs in more than 77% of black people over the age of 20, and in most cases is perfectly normal. However, it's not something to ignore: dark stripes may sometimes be a form of skin cancer that affects the nail bed, called subungual melanoma. It's important that your doctor checks it to rule out melanoma. Generally, subungual melanoma only affects one nail. Also, it will cause the stripe to change in appearance (for example, it may become wider or darker over time) and the pigmentation may also affect the surrounding skin (the nail fold). Red or brown little streaks under the nails If you have what look like red or brown little streaks underneath the nails, it's likely these are splinter haemorrhages \u2013 lines of blood caused by tiny damaged blood vessels. Just a few splinters under one nail are nothing to worry about and most likely due to injury of the nail. However, if many nails are affected, these splinters may be a sign of lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, an infection of the heart valves (endocarditis) or another underlying disease. A destroyed nail Nails can be destroyed by: injury, including nail biting skin diseases such as psoriasis or lichen planus overgrowth of the surrounding tissues, which is usually harmless (for example, due to a wart or verruca) but can sometimes be cancerous nail patella syndrome \u2013 an uncommon genetic condition which may cause missing nails, usually at birth  If one of your nails becomes destroyed and you don't remember injuring it, it's important to see your GP. Painful, red and swollen nail fold (paronychia) Paronychia is the name for inflammation of the nail fold, which is the skin and soft tissue that frames and supports the nail. This is most often caused by infection, injury or irritation. It's about three times more common in women than in men. Sometimes, there's an underlying skin condition such as eczema or psoriasis or another medical condition such as diabetes or HIV. Paronychia can be acute, where it develops over a few hours, or chronic, where it lasts more than six weeks. Acute paronychia Acute infective paronychia usually starts after a minor injury to the nail fold, such as from nail biting, picking or manicures. The affected area is red, warm, tender and swollen. After a while pus may be seen, which can form around the nail and may lift the nail. Acute paronychia is often caused by Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, although any number of germs can be involved. Treatment is with antibiotic creams or tablets. If there's a large amount of pus, it can help to have this surgically drained. Sometimes, acute paronychia is caused by the cold sore virus, in which case it's known as herpetic whitlow. Acute paronychia can completely clear in a few days with treatment, but if it's not treated or doesn't respond to treatment, it can become long-term (chronic). Chronic paronychia Chronic paronychia may start more gradually and be more difficult to get rid of. It's most common in people who often have their hands in water or chemicals, such as cleaners, bartenders, canteen staff or fishmongers. It may start in one nail fold but can affect several fingers. The affected nail folds are swollen and may be red and sore from time to time, often after exposure to water. The nail plate gradually becomes thickened and ridged as it grows, and may become yellow or green and brittle. The skin in chronic paronychia is often colonised by a mixture of yeasts and bacteria. These germs thrive on previously damaged skin, without necessarily starting the skin damage in the first place. To settle chronic paronychia, both the skin damage and the colonisation with germs needs to be addressed. It can take months for chronic paronychia to clear, and after that up to a year for nails to grow back to normal. You may find that doing things such as keeping your hands dry and warm, frequently using emollient hand cream and avoiding biting and picking your nails can help.  See your GP if the condition is severe. Depending on the type of paronychia, creams and\/or tablets may be prescribed. Use these as directed. You may be referred to a dermatologist for further investigation of the underlying skin disease or for contact allergy testing, and for treatment advice. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1190 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 662  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 277  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 143  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the nail abnormalities information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/nail_abnormalities_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Foot health Nail patella syndrome Fungal nail infection Ingrown toenail External links DermNet NZ: pictures of nail disease Getting help from the podiatrist Taking care of your feet is essential. Here's how podiatrists and chiropodists can help Footcare services for older people If you're having trouble with tasks such as cutting your toenails, local footcare services can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Testicles, undescended","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/undescendedtesticles","content":"Undescended testicles - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Undescended testicles  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview undescendedtesticles Real stories undescendedtesticles Clinical trials Undescended testicles undescendedtesticles Treatment Introduction  Undescended testicles are a common childhood condition where a boy's testicles are not in their usual place in the scrotum. It's estimated that about one in every 25 boys are born with undescended testicles. In most cases, no treatment is necessary, as the testicles will usually move down into the scrotum naturally during the first three to six months of life. However, around one in 100 boys has testicles that stay undescended unless treated. The medical term for having one or two undescended testicles is unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism. When to see your GP Undescended testicles are usually detected during the newborn physical examination carried out soon after birth, or during a routine check-up at six to eight weeks. See your GP if at any point you notice that one or both of your child's testicles are not in the normal place within the scrotum. Undescended testicles aren't painful and your child isn't at risk of any immediate health problems, but they should be monitored by a doctor in case treatment is needed later on. What causes undescended testicles? During pregnancy, the testicles form inside a baby boy's abdomen (tummy), before slowly moving down into the scrotum about a month or two before birth. It's not known exactly why some boys are born with undescended testicles. Most boys with the condition are otherwise completely healthy. Being born prematurely (before the 37th week of pregnancy), having a low birth weight and having a family history of undescended testicles may increase the chances of a boy being born with undescended testicles. Diagnosing undescended testicles Undescended testicles can usually be diagnosed after a physical examination. This will determine whether the testicles can be felt near the scrotum (palpable) or if they can't be felt at all (impalpable). This physical examination can sometimes be difficult, so your doctor may need to refer your child to a paediatric surgeon. No further scans or tests are needed to locate the testicles if they can be felt by the doctor. If they cannot be felt, part of the initial surgical treatment (see below) may involve keyhole surgery (a diagnostic laparoscopy) to see if the testicles are inside the abdomen. How undescended testicles are treated If the testicles haven't descended by six months, they're very unlikely to do so and treatment will usually be recommended. This is because boys with untreated undescended testicles can have fertility problems in later life and an increased risk of developing testicular cancer. Treatment will usually involve an operation called an orchidopexy to move the testicle(s) into the correct position inside the scrotum. This is a relatively straightforward operation, with a good success rate. Surgery is ideally carried out before 12 months of age. If undescended testicles are treated at an early age, the risk of fertility problems and testicular cancer can be reduced. Read more about treating undescended testicles. Retractile testicles In most boys, the testicles can move in and out of the scrotum at different times, usually changing position as a result of temperature changes or feelings of fear or excitement. This is a separate condition known as retractile testicles. Retractile testicles in young boys aren't a cause for concern, as the affected testicles often settle permanently in the scrotum as they get older. However, they may need to be monitored during childhood, because they sometimes don't descend naturally and treatment may be required. See your GP if you notice that your child's testicles are not within the scrotum. Your GP can carry out an examination to determine whether your child's testicles are undescended or retractile. Page last reviewed: 10\/09\/2015 Next review due: 10\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 111 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Infertility Newborn physical examination Testicular cancer External links Great Ormond Street Hospital: undescended testicles Newborn physical examination All new parents are offered a physical examination for their newborn. Find out what's involved Baby health and development reviews Find out when your baby will have their health and development reviews, and what happens at each one NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Testicular cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-testicle","content":"Testicular cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Testicular cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-testicle Real stories Cancer-of-the-testicle Clinical trials Testicular cancer Cancer-of-the-testicle Symptoms Cancer-of-the-testicle Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-testicle Treatment   Cancer of the testicle is one of the less common cancers and tends to mostly affect men between 15 and 49 years of age. The most common symptom is a painless lump or swelling in one of the testicles. It can be the size of a pea or it may be much larger. Other symptoms can include: a dull ache in the scrotum a feeling of heaviness in the scrotum It's important to be aware of what feels normal for you. Get to know your body and see your GP if you notice any changes. Read more about the look and feel of normal testicles, the symptoms of testicular cancer and diagnosing testicular cancer. The testicles The testicles are the two oval-shaped male sex organs that sit inside the scrotum on either side of the penis. The testicles are an important part of the male reproductive system because they produce sperm and the hormone testosterone, which plays a major role in male sexual development. Types of testicular cancer The different types of testicular cancer are classified by the type of cells the cancer begins in. The most common type of testicular cancer is \"germ cell testicular cancer\", which accounts for around 95% of all cases. Germ cells are a type of cell that the body uses to create sperm. There are two main subtypes of germ cell testicular cancer. They are: seminomas \u2013 which have become more common in the last 20 years and now account for 50-55% of testicular cancers non-seminomas \u2013 which account for most of the rest and include teratomas, embryonal carcinomas, choriocarcinomas and yolk sac tumours Both types tend to respond well to chemotherapy. Less common types of testicular cancer include: Leydig cell tumours \u2013 which account for around 1-3% of cases Sertoli cell tumours \u2013 which account for around 1% of cases lymphoma \u2013 which accounts for around 4% of cases This topic focuses on germ cell testicular cancer. You can contact the cancer support specialists at Macmillan for more information about Leydig cell tumour and Sertoli cell tumours. Their helpline number is 0808 808 00 00 and it's open Monday to Friday, 9am to 8pm. Read more about Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. How common is testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is a relatively rare type of cancer, accounting for just 1% of all cancers that occur in men. Around 2,200 men are diagnosed with testicular cancer each year in the UK. Testicular cancer is unusual compared to other cancers because it tends to affect younger men. Although it's relatively uncommon overall, testicular cancer is the most common type of cancer to affect men between the ages of 15 and 49. For reasons that are unclear, white men have a higher risk of developing testicular cancer compared with men from other ethnic groups. The number of cases of testicular cancer that are diagnosed each year in the UK has roughly doubled since the mid-1970s. Again, the reasons for this are unclear. Causes of testicular cancer The exact cause or causes of testicular cancer are unknown, but a number of factors have been identified that increase a man's risk of developing it. The three main risk factors are described below. Undescended testicles Undescended testicles (cryptorchidism) is the most significant risk factor for testicular cancer. About 3-5% of boys are born with their testicles inside their abdomen. They usually descend into the scrotum during the first year of life, but in some boys the testicles don't descend.  In most cases, testicles that don't descend by the time a boy is one year old descend at a later stage. If the testicles don't descend naturally, an operation known as an orchidopexy can be carried out to move the testicles into the correct position inside the scrotum. It's important that undescended testicles move down into the scrotum during early childhood because boys with undescended testicles have a higher risk of developing testicular cancer than boys whose testicles descend normally. It's also much easier to observe the testicles when they're in the scrotum. Men with undescended testicles are about three times more likely to develop testicular cancer than men whose testicles descend at birth or shortly after. Family history Having a close relative with a history of testicular cancer or an undescended testicle increases your risk of also developing it. For example, if your father had testicular cancer, you're around four times more likely to develop it than someone with no family history of the condition. If your brother had testicular cancer, you're about eight times more likely to develop it. Current research suggests a number of genes may be involved in the development of testicular cancer in families where more than one person has had the condition. This is an ongoing area of research in which patients and their families may be asked to take part. Previous testicular cancer Men who've previously been diagnosed with testicular cancer are between four to 12 times more likely to develop it in the other testicle. For this reason, if you've previously been diagnosed with testicular cancer, it's very important that you keep a close eye on the other testicle. Read: What should my testicles look and feel like? If you've been diagnosed with testicular cancer, you also need to be observed for signs of recurrence for between five and 10 years, so it's very important that you attend your follow-up appointments. Cancer Research UK has more information about testicular cancer risks and causes. Outlook Testicular cancer is one of the most treatable types of cancer, and the outlook is one of the best for cancers. In England and Wales, almost all men (99%) survive for a year or more after being diagnosed with testicular cancer, and 98% survive for five years or more after diagnosis. Cancer Research UK has more information about survival rates for testicular cancer. Almost all men who are treated for testicular germ cell tumours are cured, and it's rare for the condition to return more than five years later. Treatment almost always includes the surgical removal of the affected testicle \u2013 called orchidectomy or orchiectomy \u2013 which doesn't usually affect fertility or the ability to have sex. In some cases, chemotherapy or, less commonly, radiotherapy may be used for seminomas (but not non-seminomas). Read more about treating testicular cancer. Page last reviewed: 30\/06\/2016 Next review due: 30\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 434 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 247  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Find cancer support services Radiotherapy Testicular lumps What should my testicles look and feel like? External links Cancer Research UK: testicular cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Malecare: men, fighting cancer together My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Orchid: fighting male cancer Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Reduce your cancer risk Eating a balanced diet, being a healthy weight and drinking less alcohol could reduce your cancer risk 'I beat testicular cancer' Footballer Neil Harris was diagnosed with testicular cancer in 2001 but was back playing for Millwall FC within months Find and choose services for Testicular cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Testicular feminisation syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/androgen-insensitivity-syndrome","content":"Androgen insensitivity syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Androgen insensitivity syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Androgen-insensitivity-syndrome Clinical trials Androgen insensitivity syndrome Androgen-insensitivity-syndrome Symptoms Androgen-insensitivity-syndrome Causes Androgen-insensitivity-syndrome Diagnosis Androgen-insensitivity-syndrome Living with Introduction  Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is a rare condition that affects the development of a child's genitals and reproductive organs. A child born with AIS is genetically male, but the external appearance of their genitals may be female or somewhere between male and female. Someone with AIS may benefit from psychological support, and in some cases may have treatment to alter the appearance of their genitals. Most people born with the condition are unable to have children, but they'll otherwise be perfectly healthy and able to lead a normal life. What causes AIS? AIS is caused by a genetic fault that's usually passed on to a child by their mother. This genetic fault means that, despite being genetically male, the body doesn't respond to testosterone (the male sex hormone) properly and male sexual development doesn't happen as normal. This means the penis doesn't form or is underdeveloped. The child's genitals may appear female, or between male and female, but they don't have a womb or ovaries and have fully or partially undescended testicles. Women who carry the genetic fault won't have AIS themselves, but there's a one in four chance each child they have will be born with the condition. Read more about the causes of AIS. Types of AIS There are two main types of AIS, which are determined by how much the body is able to use testosterone. These are: complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) \u2013 where testosterone has no effect on sexual development, so the genitals are entirely female partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS) \u2013 where testosterone still has some effect on sexual development, so the genitals are often between male and female PAIS is usually noticed at birth because the genitals appear different. CAIS can be more difficult to spot, as the genitals usually look normal for a girl. It's often not diagnosed until puberty, when periods don't start and pubic and underarm hair doesn't develop. Read more about the symptoms of AIS and diagnosing AIS. Living with AIS Children with AIS and their parents are supported by a team of specialists, who will offer ongoing care and support. They will help you decide whether to raise your child as a girl or a boy while they're still very young. Most children with CAIS are raised as girls, while those with PAIS can be brought up either as girls or boys. It's up to you as a parent, with help from specialists, to decide what you think is in the best interests of your child. Once you've decided, you can learn about the treatments available that can help make your child's body look more consistent with the chosen gender and help them develop more naturally. This may involve surgery to alter the appearance or function of their genitals, and hormone treatment to encourage female or male development during puberty. Read more about how AIS is treated. Support and advice You and your child will be offered psychological support to help you understand and cope with the diagnosis of AIS. Children may not need this while they're very young, but they usually do as they get older. You'll be given advice about how and when to discuss the condition with your child. You may also find it helpful to get in touch with a support group, such as the Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome Support Group (AISSG) and DSD Families. Information about your child If your child has AIS, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Gender identity and gender dysphoria Most children with AIS grow up to feel they are the gender their parents chose to raise them as. This feeling is known as their gender identity. In a few cases, older children and adults with AIS feel their gender identity doesn't match the gender they've been raised as. This is known as gender dysphoria. People with gender dysphoria often have a desire to live as a member of the opposite sex, and may want treatment to make their physical appearance more consistent with their gender identity. If your child is diagnosed with AIS, you should be told about the issues of gender identity that could arise as your child gets older. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/01\/2016 Next review due: 14\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 49 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Disorders of sex development (DSD) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Disorders of sex development (DSD) are conditions that cause people to be born with a mix of male and female genital features. A urologist explains about the different DSD syndromes, how they affect children, and the treatment options available. Lexy, who was diagnosed with partial androgen insensitivity syndrome, explains why she started hormone therapy at the age of 34. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Disorders of sex development Gender dysphoria Puberty Transgender health External links AIS Support Group (AISSG) British Society for Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes: AIS (PDF, 257kb) The Gender Trust Disorders of sex development What happens when you develop a mix or blend of male and female sexual characteristics Transgender health Find out more about gender identity issues and read real stories about living as a trans person Find gender identity services near you Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Testicular lumps and swellings","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Testicular-lumps-benign","content":"Testicular lumps and swellings - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Testicular lumps and swellings  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Testicular lumps and swellings Testicular-lumps-benign Causes Testicular-lumps-benign Diagnosis Testicular-lumps-benign Treatment Introduction  Lumps and swellings in the testicles are a relatively common symptom in boys and men, and can have a number of different causes. The vast majority of testicular lumps and swellings are caused by benign (non-cancerous) conditions that may not need treatment, but it's important to know what's normal for you and to see your GP if you notice any changes in your testicles so they can try to identify the cause. What causes testicular lumps and swellings? There are many possible reasons why your testicles may become swollen or develop a lump. Some of the main causes are: varicoceles \u2013 swellings caused by swollen and enlarged veins within the scrotum hydroceles \u2013 swellings caused by a build-up of fluid around the testicle  epididymal cysts \u2013 lumps caused by a collection of fluid in the epididymis (a coiled tube behind the testicles) epididymo-orchitis \u2013 inflammation of the epididymis and testicles inguinal hernias \u2013 where fatty tissue or a part of your bowel pokes through into your groin, which can cause the scrotum to become enlarged A sudden and severely painful swelling in one of your testicles can be a sign of a condition called testicular torsion, which is where the blood supply to a testicle is interrupted. In rare cases, testicular lumps can be a sign of testicular cancer. Cancer Research UK estimates that fewer than four in every 100 testicular lumps are cancerous. Read more about the causes of testicular lumps and swellings.  Seeing your GP You should see your GP if you notice any lumps, swellings or changes in your testicles. Your GP will ask you about your symptoms and examine your testicles to try to identify the cause of the problem. In some cases you may be referred for further tests, such as an ultrasound scan of your scrotum, to confirm a diagnosis. If you experience sudden or severe pain in your testicles, it's important to contact your GP immediately or visit your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible because urgent treatment may be required. Read more about diagnosing testicular lumps and swellings. How testicular lumps and swellings are treated Treatment for testicular lumps and swellings will depend on the underlying cause. Many conditions do not need to be treated if they are not causing any many problems and they are not cancer. Some lumps and swellings will improve over time, and simple measures such as taking over-the-counter painkillers or wearing supportive underwear may be enough to relieve any pain or discomfort in the meantime. Surgery may be recommended to drain away any fluid or remove any solid lumps, if the problem gets worse. Testicular torsion will require urgent surgery to restore blood flow to the affected testicle because the testicle will start to die if not treated within a few hours of the problem developing. Read more about treating testicular lumps and swellings. The testicles The testicles are part of the male reproductive system. They produce sperm and testosterone (a sex hormone). The testicles sit inside a loose sac of skin known as the scrotum, which hangs down behind the penis. Page last reviewed: 07\/10\/2014 Next review due: 07\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 533 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 254  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 162  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Boys' bodies Q&A Men's health 18-39 Testicular cancer What should testicles look and feel like? External links British Association of Urological Surgeons: testicular lumps Community content from HealthUnlocked Men's health check Get the medical lowdown on five health symptoms men should never ignore NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Testicular torsion","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Testicular-lumps-benign\/Pages\/Causes.aspx#torsion","content":"Testicular lumps and swellings - Causes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Testicular lumps and swellings - Causes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Testicular lumps and swellings Testicular-lumps-benign Causes Testicular-lumps-benign Diagnosis Testicular-lumps-benign Treatment Causes of testicular lumps and swellings   Most testicular lumps and swellings are caused by benign (non-cancerous) conditions, although occasionally they can be a symptom of testicular cancer. It's important to see your GP if you notice a lump or swelling in one of your testicles so they can try to identify the cause and arrange any further tests if necessary. Read more about diagnosing testicular lumps and swellings. Some of the main types of testicular lumps and swellings are outlined below. Benign testicular lumps and swellings There are a number of different benign causes of testicular lumps and swellings. Most of these conditions are largely harmless and may not require treatment, although you should seek immediate medical advice if you suspect you have testicular torsion (see below) because it needs to be treated quickly. Varicoceles Varicoceles are soft lumps that usually develop gradually above the testicle and mostly on the left side of the scrotum (the loose sac of skin that contains the testicles). They are sometimes described as feeling like a \"bag of worms\". The exact cause of varicoceles is not clear, but it is widely thought that they occur as the result of abnormalities in the veins in the testicles leading to a build-up of excess blood in the veins, which makes them swell. The size of varicoceles can vary. Some may only be noticeable when you touch them. Others can be larger and seen easily. The side of the scrotum that contains the varicoceles may hang slightly lower than the other side. Besides a lump, varicoceles do not usually cause any other symptoms, although some men who have them experience a heavy feeling or aching pain in their scrotum or groin. In a few cases, varicoceles have been linked to infertility in men. However, there is no evidence that surgically removing them improves your chances of being able to father a baby. Hydroceles Hydroceles are swellings in the scrotum caused by a build-up of fluid. They often affect newborn babies, usually only causing a painless swelling of one or both testicles, although they can sometimes affect older boys or men, who may feel some discomfort in the scrotum. During pregnancy, a male baby's testicles develop inside his abdomen (tummy) and they pass down into the scrotum through a passage once they are formed. This passage usually closes before birth, but in some cases it stays open. If the passage remains open, fluid can pass from the abdomen into the scrotum, causing the swelling associated with a hydrocele. In most cases affecting babies, the fluid is absorbed into the surrounding tissue during the child's first year or two of life, and the hydrocele disappears. Hydroceles that develop in men or older boys may be caused by inflammation (swelling) of the scrotum resulting from problems such as an injury or infection. Epididymal cysts An epididymal cyst is a small, smooth fluid-filled swelling that slowly develops in the epididymis (a coil-like structure behind the testicles that helps to store and transport sperm). They are often painless, but the affected testicle may sometimes ache or feel heavy. You may also experience some pain and discomfort if the cyst puts pressure on other structures in or around your testicle. It's not clear what causes epididymal cysts, but they tend to be more common in middle-aged men. Epididymo-orchitis Epididymo-orchitis is the inflammation of the epididymis as well as the testicle, causing the affected testicle to become swollen, painful and tender over a matter of hours or days. It's not always clear what causes epididymo-orchitis, but the condition is often linked to an infection, including: sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as chlamydia and gonorrhoea urinary tract infections (UTIs) mumps Epididymo-orchitis can sometimes lead to a reduced sperm count in affected men, although this is rarely significant enough to cause infertility. Inguinal hernias An inguinal hernia occurs when fatty tissue or a part of your bowel, such as the intestine, pokes through into your groin at the top of your inner thigh. The hernia can appear as a swelling or lump in your groin, or as an enlarged scrotum. The lump is often painless, but it can become suddenly and severely painful if the blood supply to the section of organ or tissue trapped in the hernia has become cut off (strangulation). If you think you have a hernia that has become strangulated, you should visit your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible because urgent surgery may be required. Inguinal hernias occur when the tissue or bowel pushes through a weak spot in the surrounding muscle wall (the abdominal wall) into the inguinal canal. The inguinal canal is a channel through which blood vessels to the testicles pass in men and through which the round ligament (the ligament surrounding the womb) passes in women. Inguinal hernias occur mainly in men. Most are thought to be due to ageing. This is because as you get older, the muscles surrounding your abdomen can become weaker. They can also sometimes appear suddenly due to strain on the abdomen, such as straining on the toilet if you have constipation or carrying and pushing heavy loads. Testicular torsion Testicular torsion is a benign but serious condition caused by the spermatic cord (the cord that supplies the testicles with blood) becoming severely twisted. Unlike the other types of benign testicular lumps and swellings, testicular torsion is a medical emergency. You should contact your GP immediately or visit your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible if you suspect you have testicular torsion. Signs and symptoms of testicular torsion include: a sudden, severe pain in one of your testicles swelling of the scrotum nausea vomiting abdominal (tummy) pain If the spermatic cord becomes severely twisted, the blood supply for the affected testicle can be interrupted. If this is not treated quickly with surgery, there is a risk of losing the affected testicle. Testicular torsion can occur at any age, but is most common in boys aged 13-17 and is rare in men over 30. It can also affect newborn babies and even unborn babies in the womb. Most cases happen for no apparent reason, although the problem can occur in boys who are born with an unusually loose spermatic cord and it can develop after an injury to the testicles. You may also be at a higher risk of developing testicular torsion if you have a history of undescended testicles (where a boy is born without both testicles in their scrotum). Testicular cancer Although the vast majority of testicular lumps and swellings are benign, a lump in one of the testicles can sometimes be a sign of testicular cancer. Cancer Research UK estimates that fewer than four in every 100 testicular lumps are caused by cancer. Lumps associated with testicular cancer tend to develop slowly on the testicle itself (as opposed to the scrotum) are usually: painless (although some men do experience pain or discomfort) solid and firm not tender to touch Unlike many other types of cancer, the risk of testicular cancer does not keep increasing as you get older. The condition is most often diagnosed in boys and men between the ages of 15 and 49 and is uncommon in men older than this. Read more about the symptoms of testicular cancer. Page last reviewed: 07\/10\/2014 Next review due: 07\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 161 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Boys' bodies Q&A Men's health 18-39 Testicular cancer What should testicles look and feel like? External links British Association of Urological Surgeons: testicular lumps Men's health check Get the medical lowdown on five health symptoms men should never ignore NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Testosterone deficiency (hypogonadism)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/male-menopause","content":"Male menopause - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The 'male menopause'  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Some men develop depression, loss of sex drive, erectile dysfunction and other physical and emotional symptoms when they reach their late 40s to early 50s. Other symptoms common in men this age are: mood swings and irritability loss of muscle mass and reduced ability to exercise fat redistribution, such as developing a large belly or \"man boobs\" (gynaecomastia) a general lack of enthusiasm or energy difficulty sleeping (insomnia) or increased tiredness poor concentration and short-term memory These symptoms can interfere with everyday life and happiness, so it's important to find the underlying cause and work out what can be done to resolve it. Is there such a thing as a 'male menopause'? The \"male menopause\" (sometimes called the \"andropause\") is an unhelpful term sometimes used in the media to explain the above symptoms. This label is misleading because it suggests the symptoms are the result of a sudden drop in testosterone in middle age, similar to what occurs in the female menopause. This isn't true. Although testosterone levels fall as men age, the decline is steady \u2013 less than 2% a year from around the age of 30-40 \u2013 and this is unlikely to cause any problems in itself. A testosterone deficiency that develops later in life (also known as late-onset hypogonadism) can sometimes be responsible for these symptoms, but in many cases the symptoms are nothing to do with hormones. Personal or lifestyle issues  Lifestyle factors or psychological problems are often responsible for many of the symptoms described above. For example, erectile dysfunction, loss of libido and mood swings may be the result of either: stress depression anxiety There are also physical causes of erectile dysfunction, such as changes in the blood vessels, which may happen alongside any psychological cause. Read about the causes of erectile dysfunction. Psychological problems are typically brought on by work or relationship issues, divorce, money problems or worrying about ageing parents. A \"midlife crisis\" can also be responsible. This can happen when men think they've reached life's halfway stage. Anxieties over what they've accomplished so far, either in their job or personal life, can lead to a period of depression. Read more about the male midlife crisis. Other possible causes of the above symptoms include: lack of sleep poor diet lack of exercise drinking too much alcohol smoking low self-esteem Late-onset hypogonadism  In some cases, where lifestyle or psychological problems don't seem to be responsible, the symptoms of the \"male menopause\" may be the result of hypogonadism, where the testes produce few or no hormones. Hypogonadism is sometimes present from birth, which can cause symptoms like delayed puberty and small testes. Hypogonadism can also occasionally develop later in life, particularly in men who are obese or have type 2 diabetes. This is known as late-onset hypogonadism and it can cause the \"male menopause\" symptoms mentioned above. However, this is an uncommon and specific medical condition that isn't a normal part of ageing. A diagnosis of late-onset hypogonadism can usually be made based on your symptoms and the results of blood tests used to measure your testosterone levels. What to do If you're experiencing any of the above symptoms, see your GP. They'll ask about your work and personal life, to see if your symptoms may be caused by a mental health issue, such as stress or anxiety. If stress or anxiety are affecting you, you may benefit from medication or a talking therapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). Exercise and relaxation can also help. Read about: stress management treating anxiety help for low mood and depression exercise for depression and exercise to relieve stress Do I need HRT? Your GP may also order a blood test to measure your testosterone levels. If the results suggest you have a testosterone deficiency, you may be referred to an endocrinologist (a specialist in hormone problems). If the specialist confirms this diagnosis, you may be offered testosterone replacement to correct the hormone deficiency, which should relieve your symptoms. This treatment may be either: tablets patches gels implants injections Page last reviewed: 08\/04\/2016 Next review due: 08\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 372 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 98  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 74  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links NHS Health Check Men's health 40-60 Stress, anxiety and depression Loss of libido Erectile dysfunction External links Sexual Advice Association Royal College of Psychiatrists: men and depression Andropause Society Community content from HealthUnlocked Male sexual dysfunction Don't suffer in silence with erection problems or premature ejaculation: find out the causes and treatments The male midlife crisis The male midlife crisis is something people joke about, but it can be distressing for those going through it Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Struggling with stress? Work, relationships, money problems \u2013 many of life's demands can cause stress. Learn how to control it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tetanus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tetanus","content":"Tetanus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tetanus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tetanus Clinical trials Tetanus Introduction  Tetanus is a serious but rare condition caused by bacteria getting into a wound. The condition can be fatal if left untreated, but the tetanus vaccine and improvements in treatment mean deaths from tetanus are now very rare in the UK. In 2013, there were only seven recorded cases of tetanus in England and Wales, and no deaths. Most cases occur in people who were never vaccinated against the condition or didn't complete the entire vaccination schedule. People who inject illegal drugs are also at an increased risk. This page covers: How you get tetanus Signs and symptoms of tetanus When to seek medical advice How tetanus is treated Tetanus vaccination Tetanus vaccination for travel How you get tetanus Tetanus is caused by bacteria called Clostridium tetani. These bacteria can survive for a long time outside the body, and are commonly found in soil and the manure of animals such as horses and cows. If they enter the body through a wound, the bacteria can quickly multiply and release a toxin that affects the nerves, causing symptoms such as muscle stiffness and spasms. The bacteria can cause tetanus if they get into the body through: cuts and scrapes tears or splits in the skin burns animal bites body piercings, tattoos and injections eye injuries injection of contaminated drugs Deep wounds containing dirt or foreign objects are most likely to lead to tetanus, but the condition can occur after a minor injury you didn't notice at the time. Tetanus cannot be spread from person to person. Signs and symptoms of tetanus The symptoms of tetanus usually develop within 4 to 21 days after infection. On average, they start after around 10 days. The main symptoms include: stiffness in your jaw muscles (lockjaw) \u2013 this can make it difficult to open your mouth painful muscle spasms \u2013 these can make swallowing and breathing difficult a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above sweating a rapid heartbeat (tachycardia) Left untreated, the symptoms can continue to get worse over the following hours and days. In some cases, life-threatening problems such as suffocation or a cardiac arrest (where the heart stops beating) can occur. When to seek medical advice You should contact your GP or visit your nearest minor injuries unit if you're concerned about a wound, particularly if: the wound is deep the wound contains dirt or a foreign object you haven't been fully vaccinated against tetanus you're not sure whether you've been fully vaccinated against tetanus Your GP can assess the wound and decide if you need any treatment or need to go to hospital. You should immediately go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999 for an ambulance if you develop severe muscle stiffness or spasms. How tetanus is treated If your doctor thinks you could develop tetanus but you haven't had any symptoms yet, they will clean any wounds you have and give you an injection of tetanus immunoglobulin. They may also give you a dose of the tetanus vaccine if you haven't been fully vaccinated in the past. Tetanus immunoglobulin is a medication that contains antibodies that kill the tetanus bacteria. It offers immediate but short-term protection from tetanus. If you develop symptoms of tetanus, you'll usually need to be admitted to a hospital intensive care unit (ICU). Treatments you may have include: tetanus immunoglobulin and antibiotics a procedure to remove any dead tissue or foreign material, such as dirt, from the wound medication to relieve muscle stiffness and spasms, such as muscle relaxants and sedatives breathing support using a ventilator (a machine that helps you breathe) nutrients through a tube connected to the stomach or a drip into a vein Most people who develop symptoms of tetanus will eventually make a recovery, although this can take several weeks or months. In the UK, around 1 in every 7 to 10 people who develop tetanus will die from the condition. Tetanus vaccination A tetanus vaccination is given as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. The full course of the vaccination requires five injections, usually given on the following schedule: the first three doses are given as part of the 5-in-1 vaccine for babies at eight, 12 and 16 weeks a booster dose is given as part of the 4-in-1 pre-school booster at three years and four months of age a final booster is given as part of the 3-in-1 teenager booster at 14 years of age This course of five injections should provide long-lasting protection against tetanus. However, if you or your child has a deep or dirty wound, it's best to get medical advice. If you're not sure whether you've had the full vaccination course, contact your GP surgery for advice. It is possible to fully vaccinate older children and adults who weren't vaccinated when they were younger. Tetanus vaccination for travel Tetanus is found throughout the world, so you should ideally make sure you're fully vaccinated before travelling abroad. Contact your GP surgery for advice if you're planning on travelling abroad and haven't been fully vaccinated against tetanus, or you're going to an area with limited medical facilities and your last vaccine dose was more than 10 years ago. If you've never had a tetanus vaccination before, you may be advised to have as many of the three initial doses of the vaccine as possible before you leave (there should be one-month gaps between each dose) and complete the full course when you return. If you've had the three initial doses of the vaccine but no booster doses, having a booster dose before you travel may be recommended. If you've been fully vaccinated with all five routine doses, an additional dose of the tetanus vaccine is usually still recommended as a precaution if you're travelling to an area with limited medical facilities and your last dose of the vaccine was more than 10 years ago. Read more about travel vaccinations. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2015 Next review due: 19\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 529 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 342  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bites Cuts and grazes NHS vaccination schedule Travel health Travel vaccinations External links Fit for Travel: tetanus GOV.UK: foreign travel advice National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC): tetanus Reasons to have your child vaccinated Why it's good for your child and the whole community to be vaccinated, and the dangers of not doing so Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thalassaemia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thalassaemia","content":"Thalassaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thalassaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thalassaemia Clinical trials Thalassaemia Thalassaemia Symptoms Thalassaemia Causes Thalassaemia Diagnosis Thalassaemia Treatment Thalassaemia Living with Thalassaemia Carriers   Thalassaemia is the name for a group of inherited conditions that affect a substance in the blood called haemoglobin. People with the condition produce either no or too little haemoglobin, which is used by red blood cells to carry oxygen around the body. This can make them very anaemic (tired, short of breath and pale). It mainly affects people of Mediterranean, South Asian, Southeast Asian and Middle Eastern origin. There are a number of types of thalassaemia, which can be divided into alpha and beta thalassaemias. Beta thalassaemia major is the most severe type. Other types include beta thalassaemia intermedia, alpha thalassaemia major and haemoglobin H disease. It's also possible to be a \"carrier\" of thalassaemia, also known as having the thalassaemia trait. Thalassaemia carriers don't have any serious health problems themselves, but are at risk of having children with the condition. This page covers: Symptoms Causes Screening and testing Treatments Outlook Carriers Symptoms of thalassaemia Most people born with thalassaemia experience problems from a few months after birth. Less severe cases may not be noticeable until later in childhood or even until adulthood. The main problems associated with thalassaemia are: anaemia \u2013 severe tiredness (fatigue), weakness, shortness of breath, noticeably pounding, fluttering or irregular heartbeats (palpitations), and pale skin caused by the lack of haemoglobin excess iron in the body \u2013 this is caused by the regular blood transfusions used to treat anaemia and it can cause problems with the heart, liver and hormone levels if untreated Some people experience other problems such as delayed growth, weak and fragile bones (osteoporosis), and reduced fertility. Read more about the symptoms of thalassaemia. Causes of thalassaemia Thalassaemia is caused by faulty genes that affect the production of haemoglobin. A child can only be born with the condition if they inherit these faulty genes from both parents. For example, if both parents have the faulty gene that causes beta thalassaemia major, there's a 25% chance of each child they have being born with the condition. The parents of a child with the condition are usually carriers of thalassaemia (see below). This means they only have one of the faulty genes that causes the condition. Read more about the causes of thalassaemia. Screening and testing for thalassaemia Thalassaemia is often detected during pregnancy or soon after birth. Screening for thalassaemia in pregnancy is offered to all pregnant women in England to check if there's a risk of a child being born with the condition, and some types may be picked up during the newborn blood spot test (heel prick test). Blood tests can also be carried out at any age to check for the condition or to see if you're a carrier of a faulty gene that causes it. Read more about screening and testing for thalassaemia. Treatments for thalassaemia People with thalassaemia major or other serious types will need specialist care throughout their lives. The main treatments are: Blood transfusions \u2013 regular blood transfusions are given to treat and prevent anaemia; in severe cases these are needed around once a month. Chelation therapy \u2013 treatment with medications to remove the excess iron from the body that builds up as a result of having regular blood transfusions. Some people experience a build-up of iron even without transfusions and need treatment for this. Eating a healthy diet, doing regular exercise and not smoking or drinking excessive amounts of alcohol can also help to ensure you stay as healthy as possible. The only possible cure for thalassaemia is a stem cell or bone marrow transplant, but this isn't done very often because of the significant risks involved. Read more about how thalassaemia is treated and living with thalassaemia. Outlook for thalassaemia Although the main problems associated with thalassaemia can often be managed with treatment, it's still a serious condition that can have a significant impact on a person's life. Even in mild cases with few symptoms, there's still a risk you could pass on a more serious form of the condition to your children. Without close monitoring and regular treatment, the most severe types can cause serious organ damage and can be life-threatening. In the past, severe thalassaemia was often fatal by early adulthood. But with current treatments, average life expectancy is expected to increase significantly, with people likely to live into their 50s, 60s and beyond. Carriers of thalassaemia (thalassaemia trait) A carrier of thalassemia is someone who carries at least one of the faulty genes that causes thalassaemia, but doesn't have the condition themselves. It's also known as having the thalassaemia trait. People with this trait won't develop severe thalassaemia, but are at risk of having a child with the condition if their partner is also a carrier. You can request a blood test to check if you're a carrier of thalassaemia from your GP surgery or nearest sickle cell and thalassaemia centre. Read more about being a thalassaemia carrier. Information about you If you or your child has thalassaemia, your clinical team will pass information about you\/your child on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/05\/2016 Next review due: 17\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 183 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 103  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links South Asian health Screening for thalassaemia in pregnancy Blood transfusion Bone marrow transplant Sickle cell disease External links UK Thalassaemia Society Contact a Family: thalassaemia major healthtalk.org: screening for sickle cell and beta thalassaemia Getting tested for thalassaemia Find out what thalassaemia is, the impact it has on families and what you can find out if you carry the genes South Asian health Health issues relevant to people from India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Pakistan Blood and organ donation Have you considered donating your organs or giving blood? Find out how you could help others and how to register NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Screening for thalassaemia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/screening-sickle-cell-thalassaemia-pregnant.aspx","content":"Screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia Sickle cell disease (SCD) and thalassaemia are inherited blood disorders. If you are a carrier of sickle cell or thalassaemia, you can pass these conditions on to your baby. All pregnant women in England are offered a blood test to find out if they carry a gene for thalassaemia, and those at high risk of being a sickle cell carrier are also offered a test for sickle cell. If the mother is found to be a carrier, screening is also offered to the father.  This test should be offered before you're 10 weeks pregnant. It's important the test is done early \u2013 if you find out you're a carrier, you and your partner will have the option of further tests to know if your baby will be affected. This page covers: Why will I be offered screening in pregnancy? What does the screening test involve? Do I have to have this screening test? Getting your screening results Further tests in pregnancy if the mother's a carrier If your unborn baby has sickle cell disease or thalassaemia major What if I decide not to have screening when I'm pregnant? Can anyone have a test for sickle cell and thalassaemia? Finding out you're a carrier What if I get pregnant and already know I'm a carrier or my partner is a carrier? About sickle cell and thalassaemia Sickle cell disease and thalassaemia major affect haemoglobin, a part of the blood that carries oxygen around the body. People who have these conditions will need specialist care throughout their lives. People with sickle cell: can have episodes of very severe pain can get serious, life-threatening infections are usually anaemic \u2013 their bodies have difficulty carrying oxygen Babies with sickle cell disease can receive early treatment, including immunisations and antibiotics. This, along with support from their parents, will help prevent serious illness and allow the child to live a healthier life. Find out more about sickle cell disease. People with thalassaemia major are very anaemic and need a blood transfusion every three to five weeks, as well as injections and medicines throughout their lives. Read more about thalassaemia. There are also other less common, and less serious, haemoglobin disorders that may be found through screening. Why will I be offered screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia early in pregnancy? Screening is offered to find out if you are a carrier of a gene for sickle cell or thalassaemia and therefore likely to pass it on to your baby. Genes are the codes in our bodies for things like eye colour and blood group. Genes work in pairs: for everything we inherit, we get one gene from our mother and one gene from our father. People only have sickle cell disease or thalassaemia major if they inherit two unusual haemoglobin genes \u2013 one from their mother and one from their father. People who inherit just one unusual gene are known as \"carriers\", or as having a \"trait\". Carriers are healthy and do not have the disease. Sickle cell carriers can experience some problems in situations where their bodies might not get enough oxygen, such as having a general anaesthetic. All carriers can pass the unusual gene on to their children. When both parents are carriers When both parents are carriers, each time they are expecting a child there is: a one in four (25%) chance of the child not being affected \u2013 the baby will not have or carry the disease a one in four (25%) chance of inheriting both unusual haemoglobin genes and having the disease a two in four (50%) chance of inheriting one unusual haemoglobin gene and being a carrier Anyone can be a carrier of haemoglobin disease. However, it is more common among people with ancestors from Africa, the Caribbean, the Mediterranean, India, Pakistan, south and southeast Asia, and the Middle East. Read more about being a carrier of sickle cell disease or a carrier of thalassaemia. What does the screening test involve? Screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia involves a blood test. It's best to have the test before you are 10 weeks pregnant. This is because you'll have the option of more tests to find out whether your baby will be affected if this first test shows you're a carrier of a blood disorder. By having the test early, you and your partner can find out about all your options and make an informed decision if your baby is at risk of inheriting a blood disorder \u2013 see Further tests if the mother is a carrier.  All pregnant women are offered a test for thalassaemia, but not all women are automatically offered a test for sickle cell. In areas where haemoglobin diseases are more common, all women will automatically be offered a blood test for sickle cell. In areas where haemoglobin diseases are less common, a questionnaire is used to identify your family origins and the origins of the baby's father. If the questionnaire shows that either you or the baby's father is at risk of being a sickle cell carrier, you will be offered a screening test. You can ask to have the test even if your family origins do not suggest the baby would be at high risk of a haemoglobin disease. Can this screening harm me or my baby? No, the screening test cannot harm you or your baby, but it is important to think carefully about whether or not to have this test. It can provide information that may mean you have to make further important decisions. For example, you may be offered further tests that have a risk of miscarriage. Do I have to have this screening test? No, you do not have to have the screening test. Some people want to find out if their baby has sickle cell disease or thalassaemia, while others do not. Getting your screening results The test will tell you if you are a carrier or not, or whether you have the disease yourself. You will get the result of the blood test within two weeks. The person doing the test will discuss the arrangements for getting your results to you. If you are found to be a carrier of sickle cell or thalassaemia, you will be contacted by a specialist nurse or midwife counsellor for genetic counselling. Further tests in pregnancy if the mother is a carrier Testing to see if the father is a carrier If the screening test finds that you are a carrier of a haemoglobin disease, your baby's father will also be offered a blood test. If tests show the father is not a carrier, your baby will not have sickle cell disease or thalassaemia major and you will not be offered further tests in pregnancy. However, there is still a 50% chance your baby could be a carrier and pass on the unusual gene to their children. You can discuss the implications of you or your baby being a carrier with your GP or a healthcare professional at your local sickle cell and thalassaemia centre. Read more about finding out you're a carrier. Diagnostic tests when both parents are carriers If tests show your baby's father is also a carrier, there is a one in four chance (25%) that your baby can have the disease. You will be offered further tests called diagnostic tests to find out if your baby is affected. A diagnostic test will tell you: if your baby has sickle cell disease, thalassaemia major or another haemoglobin disorder if your baby is carrier if your baby is completely unaffected If the baby's father is not available and you have been identified as a carrier, you will be offered a diagnostic test. About 1 in 100 diagnostic tests result in a miscarriage. It is up to you whether or not to have the diagnostic test. It can be a very difficult time if you are told you are at risk of having a baby with sickle cell disease or thalassaemia major. You can talk to your midwife, specialist nurse or doctor about your situation and your options. You can also get information and support from the charity Antenatal Results and Choices (ARC). They have a helpline you can call for information and support on 0845 077 2290, or 020 7713 7486 from a mobile. There are two types of diagnostic test: chorionic villus sampling (CVS) \u2013 this is usually performed from 11 to 14 weeks of pregnancy. A fine needle, usually put through the mother's abdomen, is used to take a tiny sample of tissue from the placenta. The cells from the tissue can be tested for sickle cell or thalassaemia. Read more about CVS. amniocentesis \u2013 this is done from 15 weeks of pregnancy. A fine needle is passed through the mother's abdomen into the uterus to collect a small sample of the fluid surrounding the baby. The fluid contains some of the baby's cells, which can be tested for sickle cell or thalassaemia. Read more about amniocentesis. If you find out your unborn baby has sickle cell disease or thalassaemia major If the result shows your baby has sickle cell disease or thalassaemia major, you will be offered an appointment with a health professional. You will be able to get information about the condition the baby has inherited and talk through your choices. Some conditions are more serious than others. Some women decide to continue with the pregnancy, while others decide they do not want to continue with the pregnancy and have a termination (abortion). If you are faced with this choice, you will get professional support to help you make a decision. Support for parents is also available from the charity ARC. If the test shows you are a carrier, there is a chance that other members of your family could be carriers, too. You may want to encourage them to ask for a test, especially if they are planning to have a baby. Find out more about what to expect when a screening test suggests there might be a problem. What if I decide not to have screening when I'm pregnant? If you choose not to have the screening test, your baby can still have screening for sickle cell disease as part of newborn blood spot screening a few days after the birth. Can anyone have a test for sickle cell and thalassaemia at any time? Although testing for sickle cell and thalassaemia is only offered during pregnancy, anyone can ask their GP or local sickle cell and thalassaemia centre for a free test at any time. If you or your partner are concerned you may be a carrier, perhaps because someone in your family has a blood disorder or is a carrier, it's a good idea to get tested before you start a family. That way you can understand your risk of passing on a blood disorder to any children you have, and discuss options for a healthy pregnancy with your GP or another healthcare professional.  Finding out you're a carrier If the test shows you are a carrier of sickle cell, thalassaemia or another haemoglobin variant, you will be contacted by a specialist nurse or midwife counsellor for genetic counselling. You will get a specific carrier result depending on the unusual haemoglobin gene you have inherited. You can find more detailed information about different types of carrier  in these leaflets: Sickle cell carrier Beta thalassaemia carrier Delta beta thalassaemia carrier Haemoglobin O Arab carrier Haemoglobin C carrier Haemoglobin D carrier Haemoglobin E carrier Haemoglobin Lepore carrier There is a chance that other members of your family could be carriers, too. You may want to encourage them to ask for a test, especially if they're planning to have a baby. They can ask their GP or local sickle cell and thalassaemia centre for a free test at any time.   What if I get pregnant and already know I'm a carrier or my partner is a carrier? If one parent is a carrier If you know that either your or your partner is a carrier of sickle cell or thalassaemia, the other parent should get tested as soon as possible if you want to understand your child's risk of inheriting one of these blood disorders, so you can find out about all your options. If both parents are carriers If you're pregnant and already know that both you and your partner are carriers \u2013 for example, because you found out in a previous pregnancy \u2013 you should talk to your GP or midwife as soon as possible. You will then have the option of being fast-tracked for a diagnostic test to find out if your baby's affected. Read more about being a carrier of sickle cell disease or a carrier of thalassaemia. Page last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 7 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Screening tests in pregnancy When pregnancy goes wrong External links GOV.UK: screening tests for you and your baby Sickle Cell Society UK Thalassaemia Society Getting tested for thalassaemia Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Thalassaemia is an inherited blood disorder. This video aims to raise awareness about the condition and its impact on families. Also find out how a simple blood test can tell you if you carry the genes. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thirst","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/thirst","content":"Thirst - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thirst  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview thirst Clinical trials Thirst Introduction  Feeling thirsty all the time and for no good reason isn't normal and should be investigated by your GP. Thirst is normally just the brain's way of warning that you're dehydrated because you're not drinking enough fluid. But excessive and persistent thirst (known as polydipsia) could be a sign of an underlying problem such as diabetes. Common causes of thirst Dehydration You will usually feel thirsty because you're not drinking the amount of fluid your body needs. This may be because you've been sweating heavily or you've lost fluid because you have diarrhoea and are vomiting. You can soon quench your thirst and restore the fluid balance in your body by having a drink and ensuring you remain well hydrated. It's particularly important to stay well hydrated during hot weather, while exercising and while you're unwell with vomiting and diarrhoea. Read more about how much you should drink. Food In some cases, thirst may be caused by something as simple as a recent meal or snack. Eating salty or spicy foods can cause you to suddenly feel thirsty. Diabetes If you feel thirsty all the time, it could be a sign of diabetes \u2013 particularly if you also have other symptoms such as needing to urinate frequently, extreme tiredness (fatigue) and unexplained weight loss. Diabetes is a lifelong condition that makes it difficult to control the level of sugar (glucose) in your blood. The high levels of glucose can mean your kidneys need to produce more urine to help pass the glucose out of your body. This can make you feel thirsty because your brain is telling you to drink more to make up for the fluids you've lost. If you feel thirsty all the time and have other symptoms, your GP will probably carry out a blood glucose test to see whether you have diabetes. Pregnancy Feeling thirsty, as well as urinating more often than usual, is a common symptom in pregnancy and usually nothing to worry about. Read more about urinating a lot in pregnancy. Very occasionally, these problems can be a sign of gestational diabetes (a type of diabetes that affects women during pregnancy). You should be screened for this as part of your antenatal care if you're at risk. Medication Excessive thirst can sometimes be a side effect of certain types of medication, including lithium, certain antipsychotics and diuretics (water tablets). If you think a particular medicine is causing your thirst, it may be possible to change to a different medicine or reduce your dose. Speak to your GP about this. Other causes of thirst There are also many other potential causes of severe thirst. These include: diabetes insipidus \u2013 a condition caused by problems with a hormone that regulates the amount of fluid in the body diabetic ketoacidosis \u2013 a dangerous complication of diabetes caused by a lack of the hormone insulin in the body sickle cell anaemia \u2013 an inherited blood disorder psychogenic polydipsia \u2013 where a person with a mental health condition, such as schizophrenia, drinks excessive amounts of water that can't be excreted (got rid of) by the kidneys excessive bleeding Dry mouth Some people think they're thirsty when they actually have a dry mouth. It's important to know the difference between the two because they can have different causes. For example, a dry mouth can be caused by feelings of anxiety, certain medications, or Sjögren's syndrome. Read more about the causes of and treatments for dry mouth. Page last reviewed: 13\/04\/2015 Next review due: 13\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 369 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dehydration Diabetes Dry mouth Summer health External links Diabetes UK Diabetes.co.uk: excessive thirst Type 2 diabetes check Take this quick and simple test to find out if you are at risk of type 2 diabetes Water and drinks Find out how much you need to drink and how to choose healthier soft drinks NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Threadworms","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Threadworms","content":"Threadworms - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Threadworms  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Threadworms Threadworms Symptoms Threadworms Causes Threadworms Treatment Introduction  Threadworms, also known as pinworms, are tiny parasitic worms that infect the large intestine of humans. Threadworms are a common type of worm infection in the UK, particularly in children under the age of 10.   The worms are white and look like small pieces of thread. You may notice them around your child's bottom or in their poo. They don't always cause symptoms, but people often experience itchiness around their bottom or vagina. It can be worse at night and disturb sleep. Read more about the symptoms of threadworms. When to see your GP If you think you or your child may have threadworms, you can usually treat the infection yourself with medication available at pharmacies without a prescription. You only need to see your GP if you think you have threadworms and you're pregnant or breastfeeding, or if you think your child has threadworms and they're under two years old. In these circumstances, the recommended treatment is usually different. How threadworms are spread Threadworms lay their eggs around an infected person's anus (bottom), usually at night. Along with the eggs, the worm also secretes a mucus that causes itching. If the eggs get stuck on the person's fingertips when they scratch, they can be transferred to their mouth or on to surfaces and clothes. If other people touch an infected surface, they can then transfer the eggs to their mouth. Threadworm eggs can survive for up to two weeks before hatching. If the eggs hatch around the anus, the newborn worms can re-enter the bowel. Eggs that have been swallowed will hatch inside the intestine. After two weeks, the worms reach adult size and begin to reproduce, starting the cycle again. Read more about what causes threadworms. Treating threadworms If you or your child has threadworms, everyone in your household will need to be treated as there's a high risk of the infection spreading. This includes those who don't have any symptoms of an infection. For most people, treatment will involve taking a single dose of a medication called mebendazole to kill the worms. If necessary, another dose can be taken after two weeks. During treatment and for a few weeks afterwards, it's also important to follow strict hygiene measures to avoid spreading the threadworm eggs. This includes regularly vacuuming your house and thoroughly washing your bathroom and kitchen. If you're pregnant or breastfeeding, hygiene measures are usually recommended without medication. This is also often the case for young children.  Read more about treating threadworm infections. Preventing threadworms It's not always possible to prevent a threadworm infection, but you can significantly reduce your risk by always maintaining good hygiene and encouraging children to do the same. Children should wash their hands regularly, particularly after going to the toilet and before mealtimes. Kitchen and bathroom surfaces should be kept clean.   If your child is infected, encouraging them not to scratch the affected area around their anus or vagina will help prevent reinfection and reduce the risk of the infection spreading to others. Page last reviewed: 24\/08\/2015 Next review due: 24\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 970 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 594  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 189  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links How to prevent germs spreading Impetigo Keep your home clean Sleep problems in children Tapeworm How to treat head lice and nits Find out about the main treatments you can use to get rid of head lice and nits Looking after a sick child How to look after a sick child, including dealing with minor accidents and getting help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thrombophilia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/thrombophilia","content":"Thrombophilia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thrombophilia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrombophilia Introduction  Thrombophilia is where the blood has an increased tendency to form clots. It's not a condition or a disorder itself, and is sometimes associated with blood clots (venous thromboses) that are caused by genetic changes (mutations). If you have thrombophilia, you're more likely to develop a blood clot in one of the large veins in your leg. This is known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT).  It's important to be aware of the signs of a DVT, such as unexplained pain, swelling or tenderness in your leg (usually in your calf). See your GP as soon as possible if you have these symptoms (see below). The blood clotting process When you cut yourself, the bleeding usually triggers a number of chemical reactions in the blood. The chemical reactions cause a blood clot to form, which sticks to the injured part of the blood vessel along with blood cells called platelets. Clotting substances, known as clotting factors, help control bleeding and work with platelets to ensure the blood clots effectively. However, in thrombophilia, there's an imbalance in clotting chemicals and a person with the disorder either has too much clotting factor, or too little of the substance that prevents clotting. Types of thrombophilia There are many different types of thrombophilia. Some of the main types are outlined below. Factor V Leiden Factor V Leiden is a type of thrombophilia caused by a specific gene mutation. It's the most common type of inherited thrombophilia, with 3-8% of Europeans having one copy of the factor V Leiden mutation in each cell, and about one in 5,000 people having two copies of the mutation. It's less common in other populations. If you have Factor V Leiden, your risk of developing a DVT is increased (see above). There's also a higher risk of blood clots breaking away from their original location and travelling to other areas of your body through your bloodstream. This can be particularly serious if the blood clot becomes stuck in the main artery of your lungs (the pulmonary artery). This is known as a pulmonary embolism and it can be life-threatening (see below). Prothrombin 20210 mutation Prothrombin 20210 mutation, also known as Factor II mutation, is another genetic blood disorder that increases the risk of clots. Prothrombin is a protein in the blood which helps it to clot (thicken). However, in some people, a mutation in the gene that produces prothrombin causes too much to be produced, resulting in an increased tendency for blood clots, such as DVTs, to form. As with Factor V Leiden, prothrombin 20210 is more common in white people, particularly Europeans. Protein C, protein S or antithrombin deficiency Protein C, protein S, and antithrombin are natural anticoagulants (substances that prevent the blood from clotting). If you have low levels of these anticoagulants, or if they don't work properly, your risk of developing a DVT or pulmonary embolism is increased. Problems with protein C, protein S or antithrombin can be inherited but are rare. Antiphospholipid syndrome Antiphospholipid syndrome, also known as Hughes syndrome, is an immune system disorder that increases the risk of blood clots. Your body produces antibodies that attack phospholipids, a fat molecule thought to keep blood at the right consistency. The antibodies bind to the phospholipids, increasing your risk of a blood clot developing in a vein or artery. Symptoms of thrombophilia Thrombophilia is often mild and many people don't experience any health problems. Symptoms will only occur if the disorder causes a blood clot. People with thrombophilia are particularly at risk of developing a DVT.  Warning signs of a DVT include: pain, swelling and tenderness in one of your legs (usually your calf) a heavy ache in the affected area warm skin in the area of the clot redness of your skin, particularly at the back of your leg below the knee DVT usually, although not always, affects one leg. The pain may be worse when you bend your foot up towards your knee.  Part of the blood clot can sometimes break away and travel through the bloodstream. This is known as an embolism. Embolisms can be dangerous if they become lodged in the lungs (pulmonary embolism). This is a serious and potentially life-threatening condition because it can prevent blood from reaching your lungs. The symptoms of a pulmonary embolism are: chest or upper back pain shortness of breath coughing \u2013 usually dry but you may cough up blood or mucus containing blood feeling lightheaded or dizzy fainting See your GP immediately if you experience any combination of the above symptoms. Alternatively, you can call NHS 111 or contact your local out-of-hours service for advice. Dial 999 to request an ambulance if your symptoms are severe. Diagnosing thrombophilia Thrombophilia testing isn't routinely carried out on everyone who has a blood clot. Testing for inherited thrombophilia in people with venous thrombosis isn't usually needed because the results don't usually influence clinical decisions. For example, decisions regarding the length of treatment should be made by taking into consideration whether or not venous thrombosis was provoked, whether other risk factors are present, and the risk of bleeding due to treatment with anticoagulants, regardless of whether inherited thrombophilia is present or not. Thrombophilia is diagnosed by having blood tests weeks or months after your blood clot. The tests look for anticoagulant deficiencies. Before having the tests, you'll usually have to wait until you've stopped taking anticoagulant medicine, such as warfarin, for four to six weeks. If the blood test results indicate you have thrombophilia, you may be referred to a haematologist (a specialist in diagnosing and treating blood disorders). Treating thrombophilia Treatment may not be needed if you have mild thrombophilia. If you develop a blood clot, you'll need treatment for the blood clot and treatment to prevent further clots. You may need to take warfarin tablets or have an injection of heparin. Warfarin and heparin Warfarin and heparin are anticoagulants (anti-clotting medicine). They interfere with the clotting process and are commonly used to treat or prevent DVT and pulmonary embolisms. If you need an anticoagulant to prevent a clot, you'll be prescribed warfarin. It will take a few days to work properly. If you need instant treatment for an existing clot, you'll usually be given a heparin injection (which works straight away), as well as warfarin tablets for the first few days. The injection will either be given in hospital or at home. A heparin injection may also be given to people with antiphospholipid syndrome, before and after surgery or during pregnancy. Unlike warfarin, heparin is safe to take in pregnancy. International Normalised Ratio (INR) test Your doctor will need to adjust your warfarin dose so your blood doesn't clot easily, but isn't too high to put you at risk of bleeding problems. You'll need to have a regular blood test called the International Normalised Ratio (INR) to measure your blood clotting ability while taking warfarin. You'll have the INR test less frequently once your ideal dose has been reached (an INR of two to three is usually the aim). Lifestyle advice If you have thrombophilia, it's important you're aware of the symptoms of a blood clot (see above), and that you see your GP immediately if you think you have one. You should also take the following precautions to lower your risk of blood clots: lose weight if you're overweight stop smoking if you smoke eat a healthy, balanced diet and exercise regularly avoid being immobile for long periods because this can cause a DVT (read more about preventing DVT) If you're pregnant, or planning to get pregnant, discuss this with your GP and inform the midwife and obstetrician about your condition. You may need to take low-dose aspirin or an anticoagulant medicine while you're pregnant to prevent problems occurring during pregnancy or miscarriage. If you're having a major operation, make sure you tell the healthcare professionals treating you about your condition. You may need a heparin injection to prevent a blood clot forming. Women with thrombophilia should avoid taking the combined oral contraceptive pill or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) because they'll further increase your risk of developing a blood clot. Formation of a blood clot (thrombus)  Who gets blood clots? Anyone can get a blood clot but people most at risk are those who are unwell for long periods and unable to move around very much. Blood clots are often linked to long-haul plane journeys or the contraceptive pill, but you're much more likely to develop one after going into hospital. About two-thirds of all blood clots occur during or just after a stay in hospital. Read more about how and why blood clots occur. You can also use the venous thromboembolism (VTE) self-assessment tool to assess your risk of blood clots. Community content from HealthUnlocked Deep vein thrombosis Your risk of DVT is higher during pregnancy. Learn about the symptoms, risk factors and how it's treated Page last reviewed: 08\/09\/2014 Next review due: 08\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 70 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anticoagulants Arterial thrombosis Blood clots Deep vein thrombosis Pulmonary embolism Warfarin External links NICE: reducing VTE risk Pulmonary embolism A pulmonary embolism is a blockage in the pulmonary artery, the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the lungs Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thrombosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thrombosis","content":"Blood clots - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Blood clots  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrombosis Clinical trials Blood clots Introduction  Every year, thousands of people in the UK develop a blood clot in a vein. It's known as venous thromboembolism (VTE) and is a serious, potentially fatal, medical condition. VTE is the collective name for: deep vein thrombosis (DVT) \u2013 a blood clot in in one of the deep veins in the body, usually in one of the legs pulmonary embolism \u2013 a blood clot in the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the lungs Although serious, most blood clots can be completely avoided. The key is to be aware if you're at risk and take some simple preventative steps. This article is about blood clots in veins. If you want information on blood clots in arteries, which is a common cause of heart attack and stroke, see the topic on arterial thrombosis. Who gets blood clots? Anyone can get a blood clot, but you're more at risk if you can\u2019t move around much or if you\u2019re unwell. You\u2019ve probably heard of blood clots linked to long-haul plane journeys or the contraceptive pill, but most blood clots actually develop during or just after a stay in hospital. Your risk is also increased if you: are over 60 years old are overweight or obese have had a blood clot before are having hormone replacement therapy (HRT) are pregnant or have recently given birth are dehydrated have cancer or are having cancer treatment have a condition that causes your blood to clot more easily than normal, such as antiphospholipid syndrome The rest of this topic will focus on blood clots linked with admission to hospital. Hospital-acquired blood clots In 2005, a House of Commons Health Committee report stated that every year in England an estimated 25,000 deaths occur as a result of hospital-acquired VTE. The report also stated that the estimated number of deaths due to VTE, \"is more than the combined total of deaths from breast cancer, AIDS and traffic accidents, and more than 25 times the number who die from MRSA\". The government recognises that deaths from hospital blood clots are preventable and has recommended that all patients admitted to hospital should be assessed for their risk of developing blood clots, and measures to reduce this risk should be taken when appropriate. Assessing your risk of blood clots When you arrive at hospital, you should be checked for your risk of blood clots. Hospital staff will record your age and weight and ask you about your general health. The assessment will also take into account the reason for your hospital stay. Your risk of clots is likely to be higher, for instance, if you're having a major operation, if you're going to be confined to bed for long periods, or if you have any of the other \"risk factors\" mentioned above. If the assessment shows that you're at risk of a blood clot, you should be offered preventative treatment. The options include blood-thinning medication (anticoagulants) and compression stockings or foot pumps to keep your blood circulating and help prevent any clots forming. Hospital staff should check whether bleeding might be a problem before offering medication to help prevent clots. If you've been admitted to hospital and you haven't had your blood clot risk checked, it's important that you ask a doctor or nurse. Equally, if you've been told you're at risk of clots and have been given medicine, stockings or other devices, it's important that you understand how to use them properly. Don't be afraid to ask hospital staff about reducing your risk of blood clots \u2013 it could save your life. Questions you might like to ask your healthcare team about blood clots are: am I at risk of blood clots? how likely am I to have bleeding problems? what happens if I have problems with a medication or treatment I am having to help prevent clots? Reducing your risk of blood clots There are things you and the medical professionals looking after you can do before, during and after your hospital stay to minimise your risk of developing a blood clot. Before coming into hospital You can help yourself before coming into hospital by: trying to lose any excess weight keeping as mobile as you can talking to your doctor if you take HRT or the combined contraceptive pill \u2013 you may need to stop them a few weeks before your operation While in hospital While you're in hospital, you will reduce your chances of a blood clot if you: drink plenty of fluids to keep hydrated wear your compression stockings day and night (except when you're washing) wear any other compression devices you've been given take any blood-thinning medicines you've been offered get up and move around as soon as you're advised to After leaving hospital You're still at risk of developing a blood clot in the days and weeks after leaving hospital, so you might be advised to continue preventative measures for a short period. Your care team will discuss this with you before you are discharged. You may be given compression stockings to wear until you are fully mobile, and you may need to keep using anticoagulants for several weeks. You should also take care to stay as mobile as possible and keep yourself well hydrated. How to tell if you have a blood clot Before leaving hospital, you should be told about anything you need to look out for that could suggest you've developed a blood clot. Symptoms of a blood clot can include: cramping pain, redness, warmth, or swelling in one of your legs \u2013 these are symptoms of DVT breathlessness, chest pain, fainting or coughing up blood \u2013 these are symptoms of a pulmonary embolism If you develop symptoms of a blood clot, see your GP or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible. Blood clots can be treated if they're spotted in time. Read more about treating blood clots. Page last reviewed: 04\/02\/2015 Next review due: 04\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 367 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 128  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_71\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Arterial thrombosis Deep vein thrombosis Going into hospital Pulmonary embolism External links CLOT NICE: reducing VTE risk The National VTE Prevention Programme Thrombosis Research Institute VTE: Paul's story Ex-England goalkeeper Paul Robinson developed a blood clot after being admitted to hospital for a routine operation VTE: a guide for professionals This video offers guidance for health professionals on how to manage VTE NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thrush","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thrush","content":"Vaginal thrush - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaginal thrush  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrush Clinical trials Vaginal thrush Thrush Treatment Introduction  Vaginal thrush is a common yeast infection that affects most women at some point. It may be unpleasant and uncomfortable, but can usually be treated with medication available from pharmacies or on prescription from your GP. However, for some women, vaginal thrush can be difficult to treat and keeps coming back. This page covers: Symptoms of vaginal thrush What to do if you have vaginal thrush How to treat vaginal thrush What causes vaginal thrush? Preventing vaginal thrush Symptoms of vaginal thrush Typical symptoms of vaginal thrush include: itching and soreness around the entrance of the vagina (itchy labia) vaginal discharge \u2013 this is usually odourless and may be thick and white or thin and watery pain during sex, which may make you worry about having sex a stinging sensation when peeing Sometimes the skin around the vagina can be red, swollen or cracked. Occasionally there may also be sores on the skin, although this is more often a sign of genital herpes. You can use the vagina problems visual guide to help find out what could be causing your symptoms. What to do if you have vaginal thrush If you've had thrush before and think you have it again, you can normally treat it with medicines bought from a local pharmacy. See How to treat vaginal thrush below for more information. It's a good idea to get medical advice from your GP or a sexual health clinic if: you have thrush for the first time you're under the age of 16 or over 60 you're pregnant or breastfeeding \u2013 read more about thrush in pregnancy you have unusual symptoms, such as coloured or smelly discharge, or sores on the skin around your vagina  you have abnormal vaginal bleeding or pain in your lower tummy you've had two episodes of thrush within the last six months you've reacted badly to antifungal treatment in the past, or it didn't work you or your partner have previously had a sexually transmitted infection (STI) and you think it might have returned your symptoms don't improve after 7-14 days of treatment Thrush isn't usually anything to worry about in these cases, but your doctor may want to take a swab from your vagina to confirm the diagnosis and\/or carry out tests to check for any underlying cause. They can also advise you about the most suitable treatment and give you a prescription, if necessary. How to treat vaginal thrush Mild thrush can usually be treated with a short course of antifungal medication. The symptoms will usually clear up within a week or two. Treatment may need to be continued for longer if you have repeated bouts of thrush. Several thrush medicines can be bought over the counter from pharmacies, while others are only available on prescription from your GP. The main types are: pessaries \u2013 a special pill that you insert into your vagina using a special applicator intravaginal creams \u2013 these are also placed into the vagina using an applicator capsules \u2013 these are swallowed and may be more convenient to use than pessaries or intravaginal cream, but can have more troublesome side effects, such as vomiting or an upset stomach These treatments are all equally effective. You can usually choose the treatment you prefer, although pregnant or breastfeeding women shouldn't take the capsules. You can also get creams to apply to the skin surrounding the entrance of your vagina. These can help relieve itchiness and soreness, although you may find that an ordinary emollient (moisturiser) works just as well. Read more about treating vaginal thrush. What causes vaginal thrush? Vaginal thrush is caused by yeasts from a group of fungi called Candida. Many women have Candida in their vagina without it causing any problems, but thrush can develop if the natural balance of micro-organisms in the vagina is disrupted and Candida multiplies. You're more likely to get thrush if you: are in your twenties and thirties \u2013 thrush is less common in girls who haven't started their periods and women who have been through the menopause are pregnant have sex when you're not fully aroused or you're worried it may hurt \u2013 this can lead to vaginal dryness and tightness during sex, which can trigger thrush take antibiotics have poorly controlled diabetes have a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, because of a condition such as HIV or a treatment such as chemotherapy Vaginal thrush isn't classed as an STI, but it can be triggered by sex \u2013 particularly if you have trouble relaxing and your vagina is dry \u2013 and can occasionally be passed on to sexual partners. Preventing vaginal thrush If you get thrush frequently, you can: use water and an emollient (moisturiser) soap substitute to clean the skin around your vagina, but avoid cleaning this area more than once a day apply a greasier moisturiser to the skin around your vagina several times a day to protect it (but be aware that these moisturisers can weaken condoms) avoid potential irritants in perfumed soaps, shower gels, vaginal deodorants, wipes and douches avoid wearing tight-fitting underwear or tights \u2013 some women find that special silk underwear designed for people with eczema and thrush is helpful ensure your blood sugar level is kept under control, if you have diabetes Some women eat probiotic yoghurt or supplements to prevent vaginal thrush, but there's little evidence to suggest this works. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 04\/03\/2016 Next review due: 04\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 850 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 437  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 203  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 130  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Thrush Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. GP Dr Sarah Jarvis describes the symptoms of thrush, a yeast infection, and discusses who is most at risk and how it is treated. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Sexual health Antifungal medicines Oral thrush Thrush in men External links FPA: thrush Brook: thrush Women\u2019s Health Concern: thrush factsheet Keeping your vagina clean and healthy Find out about keeping your vagina clean and healthy without using a douche, scented wipes or perfume Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thrush, men","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thrush-men","content":"Thrush in men - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thrush in men  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrush-men Clinical trials Thrush in men Thrush-men Symptoms Thrush-men Causes Thrush-men Diagnosis Thrush-men Treatment Thrush-men Complications Introduction  Thrush is a yeast infection caused by a fungus called Candida albicans. Both men and women can get thrush, though it is more often associated with women. The medical term for thrush is candidiasis. What it looks like In men, it usually affects the head of the penis \u2013 causing irritation, discharge and redness.  Read more about the symptoms of thrush. It can also affect the skin, known as candidal skin infection, and the inside of the mouth, known as oral thrush. Should I see a doctor? If you suspect thrush for the first time, it's best to see a doctor for a diagnosis. This is because the symptoms can be similar to those of a sexually transmitted infection (STI). Your GP will be able to tell the difference. If you've had thrush before and you recognise the symptoms, you can treat it yourself with over-the-counter medication. You should also visit your GP if you have a weakened immune system and you have thrush. This is because there is a risk that a thrush infection could progress to a more serious case of invasive candidiasis. Read our page on the complications of thrush for more information about invasive candidiasis. Treating and preventing thrush You can treat thrush without prescription medications. For thrush affecting your penis, ask your chemist for clotrimazole cream or a tablet called fluconazole. For thrush infections in your groin or elsewhere, the chemist can supply a cream. It's possible for thrush to spread during sex, but it's not an STI. However, both sexual partners may need thrush treatment to prevent re-infection. Re-infection from a female partner is common. Seek advice from a pharmacist or your GP. However, not all cases are caused by sex, and many cases develop in men and women who are not sexually active. Read more about treating thrush.  You can help prevent thrush by cleaning your penis regularly and using a condom while having sex with your partner (if they have thrush). Avoid using perfumed soaps or shower gels on your genitals, as they can cause irritation. Make sure you dry your penis properly after washing. Wearing loose-fitting cotton underwear can help prevent moisture building up under your foreskin, which lowers the chances of the candida fungus multiplying.  What causes thrush? The fungus candida albicans occurs naturally in your body, particularly in warm, moist areas, such as inside the mouth and around the genitals. It does not usually cause problems because it is kept under control by your immune system (the body\u2019s natural defence against illness and infection) and other types of bacteria in the body. However, certain conditions can cause the fungus to multiply and lead to infection. You are more likely to be at risk of thrush if: you have a weakened immune system are obese, with large rolls of skin (an environment where fungi can often thrive) have type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes \u2013 as the high levels of glucose associated with diabetes can encourage the fungus to breed; people with diabetes also tend to sweat more, creating a perfect breeding environment for the fungus Read more about what causes thrush in men. Thrush Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. GP Dr Sarah Jarvis describes the symptoms of thrush, a yeast infection, and discusses who is most at risk and how it is treated. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Types of thrush Thrush can also affect the mouth, skin and, in women, the vagina. The pages in this section are all about thrush in men, but we also have information on: Oral thrush (in the mouth) Oral thrush in babies Vaginal thrush Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Page last reviewed: 13\/10\/2014 Next review due: 13\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 469 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 227  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 131  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Balanitis Oral thrush Men 18-39 Sexual health Why is my penis smelly and sore External links Embarrassing Problems Brook: advice for under 25s Men's Health Forum Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thrush, oral - adults","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Oral-thrush---adults","content":"Oral thrush in adults - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oral thrush in adults  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Oral-thrush---adults Clinical trials Oral thrush in adults Introduction  Oral thrush is a fungal infection of the mouth. It is not contagious and is usually successfully treated with antifungal medication. It is also called oral candidosis (or candiasis) because it is caused by a group of yeasts called Candida. Symptoms of oral thrush can include: white patches (plaques) in the mouth that can often be wiped off, leaving behind red areas that may bleed slightly loss of taste or an unpleasant taste in the mouth redness inside the mouth and throat cracks at the corners of the mouth a painful, burning sensation in the mouth In some cases, the symptoms of oral thrush can make eating and drinking difficult. When to seek medical advice Speak to your GP if you develop symptoms of oral thrush. If left untreated, the symptoms will often persist and your mouth will continue to feel uncomfortable. In severe cases that are left untreated, there is also a risk of the infection spreading further into your body, which can be serious. Your GP will usually be able to diagnose oral thrush simply by examining your mouth. Sometimes they may also recommend blood tests to look for certain conditions associated with oral thrush, such as diabetes and nutritional deficiencies. What causes oral thrush? Low numbers of the fungus Candida are naturally found in the mouth and digestive system of most people. They don't usually cause any problems, but can lead to oral thrush if they multiply. There are a number of reasons why this may happen, including: taking a course of antibiotics, particularly over a long period or at a high dose taking inhaled corticosteroid medication for asthma wearing dentures (false teeth), particularly if they don't fit properly having poor oral hygiene having a dry mouth, either because of a medical condition or a medication you are taking smoking having chemotherapy or radiotherapy to treat cancer Babies, young children and elderly people are at a particularly high risk of developing oral thrush, as are people with certain underlying conditions, including diabetes, an iron deficiency or vitamin B12 deficiency, an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) and HIV. As most people already have Candida fungi living in their mouth, oral thrush is not contagious. This means it cannot be passed to others. Treating oral thrush Oral thrush can usually be successfully treated with antifungal medicines. These usually come in the form of gels or liquid that you apply directly inside your mouth (topical medication), although tablets or capsules are sometimes used. Topical medication will usually need to be used several times a day for around 7 to 14 days. Tablet or capsules are usually taken once daily. These medications don't often have side effects, although some can cause nausea (feeling sick), vomiting, bloating, abdominal (tummy) pain and diarrhoea. If antibiotics or corticosteroids are thought to be causing your oral thrush, the medicine \u2013 or the way it is delivered \u2013 may need to be changed or the dosage reduced. Preventing oral thrush There are a number of things you can do to reduce your chances of developing oral thrush, including: rinsing your mouth after meals brushing your teeth twice a day with a toothpaste that contains fluoride and interdental cleaning (flossing) regularly visiting your dentist regularly for check-ups, even if you wear dentures or have no natural teeth removing your dentures every night, cleaning them with paste or soap and water before soaking them in a solution of water and denture-cleaning tablets brushing your gums, tongue and inside your mouth with a soft brush twice a day if you wear dentures or have no or few natural teeth visiting your dentist if your dentures do not fit properly stopping smoking if you smoke rinsing your mouth with water and spitting it out after using a corticosteroid inhaler, and using a spacer (a plastic cylinder that attaches to the inhaler) when you take your medicine ensuring that any underlying condition you have, such as diabetes, is well controlled If you have a condition or are receiving treatment that could put you at a high risk of developing oral thrush, your doctor may recommend taking a course of antifungal medication to prevent this happening. Read more about dental health and looking after dentures. Other types of thrush Thrush can also affect the vagina, skin and the head of the penis (glans). For more information about other types of thrush, see: oral thrush in babies vaginal thrush thrush in men Page last reviewed: 14\/08\/2014 Next review due: 14\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 683 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 282  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 163  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 128  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Explore this topic Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Corticosteroids Dental health Dentures Oral thrush in babies Thrush in men Vaginal thrush External links Dental Health Foundation: thrush Diabetes UK Coated tongue Common causes, and what you can do Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thrush, oral - babies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Oral-thrush---babies","content":"Oral thrush in babies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oral thrush in babies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Oral-thrush---babies Clinical trials Oral thrush in babies   Oral thrush in babies and young children is a fungal infection in the mouth that's usually harmless and easily treatable. Although babies and young children are particularly at risk, oral thrush can also affect adults. Read about: Oral thrush in adults This topic covers: Signs of oral thrush When to seek medical advice Causes of oral thrush Treating oral thrush Advice for breastfeeding mothers Preventing oral thrush Signs of oral thrush in babies The main sign of oral thrush is a white coating on your baby's tongue, although there may also be white patches elsewhere in the mouth. This coating may look like curd or cottage cheese and usually can't be rubbed off easily. If your baby has a white coating on their tongue that does rub off easily, it's more likely to be milk coating the tongue and not thrush. Babies may not seem bothered by the patches, but they may be reluctant to feed \u2013 or keep detaching from the breast during feeds \u2013 if they're sore. There may also be associated nappy rash caused by the same infection that needs to be treated as well. When to seek medical advice Oral thrush in babies isn't usually serious, but you should visit your GP if you think your child may have the condition. You can also ask your health visitor for advice or call NHS 111. If there's any doubt about the diagnosis, your GP may take a swab from your baby's mouth and send it to a lab to be tested. Causes of oral thrush in babies Oral thrush is caused by a yeast fungus called Candida albicans. Healthy people have this fungus in their mouths and it doesn't normally cause problems. But it can overgrow and infect the membranes in the mouth. Babies are at an increased risk of oral thrush because their immune systems haven't yet fully developed and are less able to resist infection. This is particularly the case with babies born prematurely (before 37 weeks of pregnancy). Oral thrush can also affect babies if they've recently been treated with antibiotics. Antibiotics reduce the levels of healthy bacteria in your baby's mouth, which can allow fungus levels to increase. If you're breastfeeding and have been taking antibiotics for an infection, your own levels of healthy bacteria in your body can be affected. This can also make you prone to a thrush infection that may then be passed to your baby during breastfeeding. Treating oral thrush in babies If your GP or health visitor feels your baby needs treatment, they'll probably prescribe an antifungal medicine. The two main antifungal medicines used to treat oral thrush in babies are: miconazole nystatin These medications usually need to be used up to four times a day and are most effective if used after your baby has had a feed or drink. Continue to use the medicine for two days after the infection has cleared up as this will help prevent the infection coming back. If treatment hasn't fully cleared the thrush after a week of treatment, speak to your GP or health visitor again for advice. Miconazole In most cases, miconazole will be the first treatment recommended by a GP. It's available as a gel that you apply to the affected areas using a clean finger. It's important only to apply a little at a time and to try to avoid the back of your baby's mouth to reduce the risk of choking. A small number of babies are sick after being treated with miconazole, but this side effect usually passes and isn't normally any cause for concern. Nystatin In some cases, your GP or health visitor may recommend an alternative medication called nystatin. This comes as a liquid medicine (suspension) that's applied directly to the affected area using a dropper (oral dispenser) supplied with the medicine. Nystatin doesn't usually cause any side effects and most babies have no trouble taking the medication. Advice for breastfeeding mothers If your baby has oral thrush and you're breastfeeding, it's possible for your baby to pass a thrush infection to you. This can affect your nipples or breasts and cause nipple thrush. Symptoms of nipple thrush can include: pain while you're feeding your baby, which may continue after the feed is finished cracked, flaky or sensitive nipples and areolas (the darker area around your nipple) changes in the colour of your nipples or areolas If you have nipple thrush, or there's a risk of your baby passing thrush on to you, you'll normally be advised to continue breastfeeding while using an antifungal cream such as miconazole to treat the infection. You should apply the cream to your nipples after every feed, and remove any that's left before the next feed. In severe cases of nipple thrush, antifungal tablets may be recommended. Preventing oral thrush in babies It's not clear whether it's possible to prevent oral thrush in babies. Some doctors suggest the following advice may help: sterilise dummies regularly, as well as any toys that your baby puts in their mouth sterilise bottles and other feeding equipment regularly, especially the teats Washing your hands thoroughly after changing your baby's nappy can also be helpful in stopping thrush spreading because the infection can be passed through their digestive system. Page last reviewed: 19\/07\/2016 Next review due: 19\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 224 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breastfeeding and thrush Can my baby's oral thrush affect me if I'm breastfeeding? Oral thrush in adults External links Breastfeeding Network Family Lives Breastfeeding and thrush Breast and nipple pain in breastfeeding women is sometimes caused by a thrush (candida) infection in the breast. Find out how to spot and treat thrush Soothing a crying baby It can be hard to know what a crying baby needs, especially in the early days. Use these tips to help soothe them Medicines for babies and children Not all medicines are suitable for young children. Find out what to use to treat your sick child NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thyroid cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-thyroid","content":"Thyroid cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thyroid cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-thyroid Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-thyroid Community Thyroid cancer Cancer-of-the-thyroid Symptoms Cancer-of-the-thyroid Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-thyroid Treatment   Thyroid cancer is a rare type of cancer that affects the thyroid gland, a small gland at the base of the neck that produces hormones. It's most common in people in their 30s and those over the age of 60. Women are two to three times more likely to develop it than men. Thyroid cancer is usually treatable and in many cases can be cured completely, although it can sometimes come back after treatment. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Types Causes Treatments Outlook Symptoms of thyroid cancer Symptoms of thyroid cancer can include: a painless lump or swelling in the front of the neck \u2013 although only 1 in 20 neck lumps are cancer swollen glands in the neck unexplained hoarseness that doesn't get better after a few weeks a sore throat that doesn't get better difficulty swallowing Read more about the symptoms of thyroid cancer. When to get medical advice See your GP if you have symptoms of thyroid cancer. The symptoms can be caused by less serious causes, such as an enlarged thyroid (goitre), so it's important to get them checked out. Your GP will examine your neck and can organise a blood test to check how well your thyroid is working. If they think you could have cancer or they're not sure what's causing your symptoms, you'll be referred to a hospital specialist for more tests. Read more about how thyroid cancer is diagnosed. Types of thyroid cancer There are four main types of thyroid cancer: papillary carcinoma \u2013 the most common type, accounting for about 8 in 10 cases; it usually affects people under 40, particularly women follicular carcinoma \u2013 accounts for up to 1 in 10 cases and tends to affect middle-aged adults, particularly women medullary thyroid carcinoma \u2013 accounts for less than 1 in 10 cases; unlike the other types, it can run in families anaplastic thyroid carcinoma \u2013 the rarest and most serious type, accounting for around 1 in 50 cases; it usually affects people over the age of 60 Papillary and follicular carcinomas are sometimes known as differentiated thyroid cancers. They tend to be easier to treat than the other types. Causes of thyroid cancer Thyroid cancer occurs when a change to the DNA in the cells in the thyroid causes them to grow uncontrollably and produce a lump. It's not usually clear what causes this, but there are a number of things that can increase your risk. These include: other thyroid conditions, such as an inflamed thyroid (thyroiditis) or goitre \u2013 but not an overactive thyroid or underactive thyroid a family history of thyroid cancer \u2013 your risk is higher if a close relative has had thyroid cancer radiation exposure in childhood \u2013 such as radiotherapy obesity a bowel condition called familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) acromegaly \u2013 a rare condition where the body produces too much growth hormone Treatments for thyroid cancer Treatment for thyroid cancer depends on the type of thyroid cancer you have and how far it has spread. The main treatments are: surgery \u2013 to remove part or all of the thyroid radioactive iodine treatment \u2013 you swallow a radioactive substance that travels through your blood and kills the cancer cells external radiotherapy \u2013 a machine is used to direct beams of radiation at the cancer cells to kill them chemotherapy and targeted therapies \u2013 medications used to kill cancer cells After treatment, you'll be advised to have regular appointments to check whether the cancer has come back. Read more about how thyroid cancer is treated. Outlook for thyroid cancer Overall, the outlook for thyroid cancer is good. Around 9 in every 10 people are alive five years after diagnosis. Many of these are cured and will have a normal lifespan. But the outlook varies depending on the type of thyroid cancer and how early it was diagnosed. For example: more than 9 in 10 people with papillary carcinoma live at least five years after diagnosis more than 8 in 10 people with follicular carcinoma live at least five years after diagnosis around 6 or 7 in 10 people with medullary thyroid carcinoma live at least five years after diagnosis fewer than 1 in 10 people with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma live at least five years after diagnosis The cancer comes back in another part of the body, such as the lungs or bones, in up to one in four people treated for thyroid cancer. But it can often be treated again if this happens. Page last reviewed: 17\/08\/2016 Next review due: 17\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 203 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links British Thyroid Foundation Butterfly Thyroid Cancer Trust Cancer Research UK: thyroid cancer Macmillan: thyroid cancer Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Thyroid cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thyroid eye disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Exophthalmos","content":"Exophthalmos (bulging eyes) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Exophthalmos (bulging eyes)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Exophthalmos Clinical trials Exophthalmos Exophthalmos Treatment Introduction  Exophthalmos is a medical term for a bulging or protruding eyeball or eyeballs. It is often used interchangeably with the term \"proptosis\", which means the same thing. What causes exophthalmos? Exophthalmos can be caused by many different conditions. It's important that the underlying cause is identified so appropriate treatment can be given. Thyroid eye disease One of the main causes of exophthalmos in the UK is thyroid eye disease, also known as Graves' ophthalmopathy. This is an autoimmune condition that affects around one in every three people with an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) caused by Graves' disease. It is particularly common in women who are 30-50 years of age and people who smoke. An autoimmune condition is where the immune system (the body's defence against illness and infection) mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. In the case of thyroid eye disease, the immune system attacks the muscles and fatty tissues around and behind the eye, causing them to become inflamed (swollen). Graves' disease is an autoimmune condition in which the thyroid is attacked, leading to an increase in the level of thyroid hormones in your blood. It's not clear exactly why thyroid eye disease sometimes occurs along with this condition. Thyroid eye disease can also occasionally affect people with an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) and, in rare cases, people with seemingly normal thyroid function. Other causes Exophthalmos can also have a number of other causes, but these are generally less common than thyroid eye disease. Other cause of exophthalmos can include: an injury to the eyes bleeding behind the eyes abnormally shaped blood vessels behind the eyes an infection of the tissue in the eye socket cancerous tumours \u2013 such as those caused by neuroblastoma and some soft tissue sarcomas Exophthalmos can also affect newborn babies if they are born with eye sockets that are shallower than normal. Other problems associated with exophthalmos Depending on what is causing your bulging eyes, you may also have other associated symptoms. For example, if exophthalmos is caused by a thyroid eye disease, your eyes may also be: inflamed, red and painful dry and \"gritty\" tearful sensitive to light (photophobia) You may also experience some double vision. In severe cases of exophthalmos, you may not be able to close your eyes properly. This can damage your corneas (the transparent tissue that covers the front of your eye) by causing them to dry out. If your corneas become very dry, an infection or ulcers (open sores) may develop. These could damage your vision if left untreated. There is also a small risk of the optic nerve (which transmits signals from the eye to the brain) becoming compressed if you have exophthalmos, which may affect your sight permanently if it is not treated quickly. Seeking medical advice It's important to see your GP or an optometrist (optician) if you notice that one or both of your eyes are protruding, as treatment is often more effective if it's started as soon as possible. If necessary, your GP or optometrist can refer you to an ophthalmologist (a specialist in diagnosing and treating eye conditions) for further assessment. The ophthalmologist will check how well you are able to move your eyes. They may also use an instrument called an exophthalmometer to measure how far your eyeball protrudes. If the ophthalmologist wants to examine your eye socket in more detail, a computerised tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan may be carried out. You may also have a blood test to assess how well your thyroid gland is working, and you may be referred for an assessment by an endocrinologist (a specialist in conditions affecting glands and hormones) if you are found to have abnormal thyroid hormone levels. Treating exophthalmos If exophthalmos is being caused by thyroid eye disease, the following treatments are often helpful: medication to correct the level of thyroid hormones in your blood \u2013 this will not necessarily improve the problems with your eyes, but may stop them getting worse corticosteroid medication given directly into a vein (intravenously) \u2013 this can help reduce the inflammation associated with the condition corrective surgery \u2013 this may be carried out to improve the appearance of your eyes once the inflammation is under control Other useful measures include stopping smoking, using artificial tears to reduce eye dryness and irritation, and wearing special lenses to correct double vision. In other cases, treatment will vary depending on the underlying cause of the condition. For example, treatments such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy and\/or surgery may be recommended if exophthalmos is caused by a tumour. Read more about treating exophthalmos. Outlook The outlook for exophthalmos can vary considerably. Many of the symptoms of thyroid eye disease tend to improve over time, although this can take a number of years, and there is a chance your eyes will continue to protrude if corrective surgery is not carried out. Some people with exophthalmos are left with long-term vision problems, such as double vision, but permanent visual impairment is rare if the condition is identified and treated promptly. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2014 Next review due: 02\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 37 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Double vision Dry eyes Eye health Eyelid problems Overactive thyroid Red eye Underactive thyroid External links British Thyroid Association British Thyroid Foundation Eyecare Trust: thyroid eye disease RNIB: thyroid eye disease Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery Overactive thyroid Overactive thyroid, also known as hyperthyroidism, is a relatively common condition that occurs when there is too much thyroid hormone in the body Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thyroid, overactive","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thyroid-over-active","content":"Overactive thyroid - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Overactive thyroid  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thyroid-over-active Clinical trials Thyroid-over-active Community Overactive thyroid Thyroid-over-active Symptoms Thyroid-over-active Causes Thyroid-over-active Diagnosis Thyroid-over-active Treatment Thyroid-over-active Complications Introduction  Overactive thyroid (also known as hyperthyroidism) is a relatively common hormonal condition that occurs when there is too much thyroid hormone in the body. Excess levels of thyroid hormones can then speed up the body\u2019s metabolism, triggering a range of symptoms, such as: nervousness and anxiety hyperactivity \u2013 where a person can\u2019t stay still and is full of nervous energy unexplained or unplanned weight loss  swelling of the thyroid gland, which causes a noticeable lump, known as a goitre, to form in the throat The severity, frequency and range of symptoms can vary from person to person. Read more about the symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland. What causes an overactive thyroid gland? The thyroid gland is found in the neck. It produces hormones that are released into the bloodstream to control the body's growth and metabolism. These hormones are called thyroxine and triiodothyronine. They affect processes such as heart rate and body temperature, and help convert food into energy to keep the body going. In hyperthyroidism, the thyroid gland produces too much thyroxine or triiodothyronine, which speeds up the body's metabolism. There are several possible underlying causes, the most common being Graves' disease, in which the body's immune system targets the thyroid gland and causes it to produce too much of the thyroid hormones. Read more about the causes of an overactive thyroid gland. Treatment An overactive thyroid usually responds well to treatment, and most people are able to control their symptoms. The three most widely used treatments for an overactive thyroid gland are: thionamides \u2013 a group of medications, including carbimazole and methimazole, that stop the thyroid gland producing too much thyroid hormone radioiodine treatment \u2013 a radioactive substance called iodine that helps shrink the thyroid gland, reducing its activity (the radiation contained in iodine is a very low dose and does not pose a threat to health) surgery \u2013 in a small number of cases surgery may be required to remove some or all of the thyroid gland, particularly if there is a large goitre Beta-blockers may also sometimes be used to temporarily relieve many symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland, although it doesn't target the thyroid gland itself. It's common for treatment to lead to the thyroid not producing enough hormones. This is known as having an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism). However, an underactive thyroid is not usually serious and is easily treated. Read more about the treatment of an overactive thyroid gland. Complications Around 1 in 20 people with Graves' disease will also develop symptoms affecting their eyes, such as: double vision  sensitivity to light (photophobia) tearing (excess production of tears) This is known as Graves' ophthalmopathy and should be seen by a doctor who specialises in treating eye conditions (an ophthalmologist). A rarer and more serious complication is a sudden and severe flare-up of symptoms, known as a thyroid storm. A thyroid storm can be life-threatening, as it causes severe dehydration and heart problems. Read more about the complications of an overactive thyroid gland. Who is affected Women are 10 times more likely to have an overactive thyroid gland than men. It is estimated that around 1 in 50 women in England currently live with an overactive thyroid gland. In most cases, symptoms will begin somewhere between the ages of 20 and 40, though they can start at any age, including in childhood. An overactive thyroid gland occurs most frequently in white and Asian people, and less frequently in African-Caribbean people. Overactive thyroid gland Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An endocrinologist explains what causes an overactive thyroid gland, leading to over-production of thyroid hormones, and the variety of treatment options. Media last reviewed: 02\/02\/2015 Next review due: 02\/02\/2017 Page last reviewed: 05\/08\/2014 Next review due: 05\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 701 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 365  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 190  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Underactive thyroid Goitre Women's health 18-39 Thyroiditis External links British Thyroid Foundation Unexpected weight loss The most common reasons for sudden weight loss, and when to see your GP Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thyroid, underactive","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Thyroid-under-active","content":"Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thyroid-under-active Clinical trials Thyroid-under-active Community Underactive thyroid Thyroid-under-active Symptoms Thyroid-under-active Causes Thyroid-under-active Diagnosis Thyroid-under-active Treatment Thyroid-under-active Complications Introduction  An underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) is where your thyroid gland doesn't produce enough hormones. Common signs of an underactive thyroid are tiredness, weight gain and feeling depressed. An underactive thyroid can often be successfully treated by taking daily hormone tablets to replace the hormones your thyroid isn't making. There's no way of preventing an underactive thyroid. Most cases are caused either by the immune system attacking the thyroid gland and damaging it, or by damage to the thyroid that occurs during some treatments for an overactive thyroid or thyroid cancer. Read more about the causes of an underactive thyroid. When to see your GP Symptoms of an underactive thyroid are often similar to those of other conditions, and they usually develop slowly, so you may not notice them for years. You should see your GP and ask to be tested for an underactive thyroid if you have symptoms including: tiredness weight gain depression  being sensitive to the cold dry skin and hair muscle aches The only accurate way of finding out whether you have a thyroid problem is to have a thyroid function test, where a sample of blood is tested to measure your hormone levels. Read more about testing for an underactive thyroid. Who's affected Both men and women can have an underactive thyroid, although it's more common in women. In the UK, it affects 15 in every 1,000 women and 1 in 1,000 men. Children can also develop an underactive thyroid. Around 1 in 3,500-4,000 babies are born with an underactive thyroid (congenital hypothyroidism). All babies born in the UK are screened for congenital hypothyroidism using a blood spot test when the baby is about five days old. Treating an underactive thyroid Treatment for an underactive thyroid involves taking daily hormone replacement tablets, called levothyroxine, to raise your thyroxine levels. You'll usually need treatment for the rest of your life. However, with proper treatment, you should be able to lead a normal, healthy life. If an underactive thyroid isn't treated, it can lead to complications, including heart disease, goitre, pregnancy problems and a life-threatening condition called myxoedema coma (although this is very rare). Read more about treating an underactive thyroid and the complications of an underactive thyroid. The thyroid gland The thyroid gland is a small butterfly-shaped gland in the neck, just in front of the windpipe (trachea). One of its main functions is to produce hormones that help regulate the body's metabolism (the process that turns food into energy). These hormones are called triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4). Many of the body's functions slow down when the thyroid doesn't produce enough of these hormones. Page last reviewed: 11\/05\/2015 Next review due: 11\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2272 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 582  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 150  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 337  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Goitre Thyroid cancer Overactive thyroid External links British Thyroid Foundation Thyromind Lab Tests Online: TSH Lab Tests Online UK: T4 test 10 medical reasons for feeling tired Any serious illness \u2013 and some minor ones \u2013 can make you tired. Here are 10 health conditions that can cause fatigue Tiredness and fatigue What makes you tired, plus how to boost your energy with an energy diet and other self-help tips Forum content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Thyroiditis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/thyroiditis","content":"Thyroiditis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thyroiditis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview thyroiditis Clinical trials thyroiditis Community Thyroiditis Introduction  Thyroiditis is the medical term for inflammation (swelling) of the thyroid gland, which can either cause abnormally high or low levels of thyroid hormones in the blood. The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland found in the neck. It produces hormones that are released into the bloodstream to control the body's growth and metabolism. They affect processes such as heart rate and body temperature, and help convert food into energy to keep the body going. There are several different types of thyroiditis. The common types are: Hashimoto's thyroiditis (the most common) de Quervain's or subacute thyroiditis  post-partum thyroiditis (triggered after giving birth) silent or painless thyroiditis  drug-induced thyroiditis  radiation-induced thyroiditis  acute or infectious thyroiditis  The symptoms and treatment of these conditions are briefly described below.  Hashimoto's thyroiditis  Hashimoto's thyroiditis is an autoimmune condition. This means your immune system mistakenly attacks your thyroid gland, causing it to gradually swell and become damaged. As the thyroid gland is slowly destroyed over time, it is unable to produce sufficient amounts of thyroid hormone. The medical term for low levels of thyroid hormone in the blood is hypothyroidism. This leads to symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland, which are very general and can include: fatigue weight gain constipation dry skin depression The swollen thyroid gland may also cause a lump to form in your throat, known as a goitre. It may take months or even years for the condition to be detected, because the disease progresses very slowly. The cause of Hashimoto's thyroiditis is not understood, but it sometimes appears to run in families, suggesting your genes may make you more likely to develop the condition. Hashimoto's thyroiditis is also associated with other autoimmune conditions, such as Addison's disease and type 1 diabetes. It is usually seen in women aged 30 to 50.  Hashimoto's thyroiditis cannot be cured, so the low levels of thyroid hormone are usually permanent. However, the symptoms are often easily treated with the thyroid hormone replacement medication levothyroxine, which is usually taken for life. Surgery is only rarely needed, for instance if your goitre is particularly uncomfortable  or there are suspicions of cancer. Read about treating an underactive thyroid gland and treating goitre. De Quervain's (subacute) thyroiditis  De Quervain's thyroiditis (sometimes called subacute thyroiditis) is a painful swelling of the thyroid gland that is thought to be triggered by a viral infection, such as mumps or the flu.  It's most commonly seen in females aged 20 to 50. De Quervain's thyroiditis usually causes a fever and pain in the neck, jaw or ear. It can also cause your thyroid gland to release too much thyroid hormone into the blood (thyrotoxicosis), leading to symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism), including: anxiety insomnia heart palpitations weight loss irritability The palpitations and shakes associated with thyrotoxicosis can be treated with a beta-blocker. The pain caused by de Quervain\u2019s thyroiditis can often be relieved with painkillers such as aspirin, or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen. In the cases where these medications are ineffective, corticosteroid medication may be prescribed. De Quervain\u2019s thyroiditis settles down after a few days and is often followed by a spell of hypothyroidism lasting a few weeks or months, before the thyroid gland recovers completely. Very occasionally, the condition may recur or the low levels of thyroid hormones caused by it can be permanent and may require long-term treatment with thyroid hormone replacement medication. Post-partum thyroiditis  Like Hashimoto's thyroiditis, post-partum thyroiditis is an autoimmune condition, but it only happens in women who have recently given birth. In post-partum thyroiditis, your immune system attacks your thyroid gland within around six months of giving birth, causing a temporary rise in thyroid hormone levels (thyrotoxicosis) and symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland. Then, after a few weeks, your thyroid gland becomes depleted of thyroid hormone, leading to low levels of thyroid hormone and symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland. However, not every woman with post-partum thyroiditis will go through both these phases.  If low thyroid hormone levels are causing severe symptoms, you may need to take thyroid hormone replacement until the condition gets better. In most women with the condition, thyroid function returns to normal within 12 months after the baby is born, although the low thyroid hormone levels can sometimes be permanent. Silent (painless) thyroiditis  Silent thyroiditis is very similar to post-partum thyroiditis. It is also an autoimmune condition, but is not related to giving birth and can occur in both men and women. Like postpartum thyroiditis, there may be a phase of high thyroid hormone levels (thyrotoxicosis), causing symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland. This may then be followed by a phase of symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland, before the symptoms eventually go away within around 12 to 18 months. If low thyroid hormone levels are causing severe symptoms, you may need to take thyroid hormone replacement until the condition gets better. In a few cases, the low thyroid levels can be permanent. Drug-induced thyroiditis  Thyroiditis can also be triggered by medications including interferon, amiodarone, lithium and a class of drugs to treat certain cancers (which include sunitinib), if these medicines damage the thyroid gland. There may be symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland or symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland, but these are usually short-lived and may get better after you stop taking the medication causing the condition. However, you should not stop taking any medication that has been prescribed for you without first discussing it with your doctor. Drug-induced thyroiditis can sometimes cause pain in the area around the thyroid gland. This can often be relieved with NSAIDs, although corticosteroid medication may occasionally be needed. Radiation-induced thyroiditis  Radioactive iodine treatment for an overactive thyroid gland or radiotherapy for certain cancers can also damage the thyroid gland, leading to symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland or symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland. The low levels of thyroid hormone after radioactive iodine is usually permanent, and may cause symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland that will need to be managed with lifelong thyroid hormone replacement treatment.  Acute or infectious thyroiditis  Acute or infectious thyroiditis is usually triggered by a bacterial infection. It is rare and is associated with either a weakened immune system or, in children, with a problem in the development of the thyroid. Symptoms may include pain in the throat, feeling generally unwell, swelling of the thyroid gland and sometimes symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland or symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland. These symptoms will usually get better when the infection is treated with antibiotics. In the meantime, thyroid pain can often be managed with NSAIDs. Children will usually require an operation to remove the abnormal part of the thyroid. The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland found in the neck  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/09\/2014 Next review due: 26\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 81 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Underactive thyroid gland Overactive thyroid gland Goitre External links British Thyroid Foundation Lab Tests Online: thyroid function tests Underactive thyroid Hypothyroidism is usually treated by taking hormone-replacement tablets called levothyroxin Overactive thyroid Overactive thyroid, also known as hyperthyroidism, is a relatively common condition that occurs when there is too much thyroid hormone in the body NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"TIA","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Transient-ischaemic-attack","content":"Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Transient ischaemic attack (TIA)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Transient-ischaemic-attack Clinical trials Transient ischaemic attack Transient-ischaemic-attack Symptoms Transient-ischaemic-attack Causes Transient-ischaemic-attack Diagnosis Transient-ischaemic-attack Treatment Transient-ischaemic-attack Prevention Introduction  A transient ischaemic attack (TIA) or \"mini stroke\" is caused by a temporary disruption in the blood supply to part of the brain. The disruption in blood supply results in a lack of oxygen to the brain. This can cause sudden symptoms similar to those of a stroke, such as speech and visual disturbance, and numbness or weakness in the face, arms and legs. However, a TIA does not last as long as a stroke. The effects often only last for a few minutes or hours and fully resolve within 24 hours. Signs and symptoms The main symptoms of a TIA can be remembered with the word FAST: Face-Arms-Speech-Time. Face \u2013 the face may have dropped on one side, the person may not be able to smile, or their mouth or eye may have dropped. Arms \u2013 the person with suspected stroke may not be able to lift both arms and keep them there because of arm weakness or numbness in one arm. Speech \u2013 their speech may be slurred or garbled, or the person may not be able to talk at all, despite appearing to be awake. Time \u2013 it is time to dial 999 immediately if you see any of these signs or symptoms. Read more about the symptoms of a TIA. Seeking medical advice In the early stages of a TIA, it's not possible to tell whether you are having a TIA or a full stroke, so it's important to phone 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance. Even if the symptoms disappear while you are waiting for the ambulance to arrive, an assessment in hospital should still be carried out. A TIA is a warning that you are at risk of having a full stroke in the near future, and an assessment can help doctors to determine the best way to reduce the chances of this happening. If you think you may have had a TIA previously, but the symptoms have since passed and you didn't seek medical advice at the time, you should make an urgent appointment with your GP so they can determine whether to refer you for a hospital assessment. Read more about diagnosing a TIA. What causes TIAs? During a TIA, one of the blood vessels that supply your brain with oxygen-rich blood becomes blocked. This blockage is usually caused by a blood clot that has formed elsewhere in your body and travelled to the blood vessels supplying the brain, although it can also be caused by pieces of fatty material or air bubbles. Certain things can increase your chances of having a TIA, including: smoking having high blood pressure (hypertension) being obese having high cholesterol levels regularly drinking an excessive amount of alcohol having atrial fibrillation (a type of irregular heartbeat) having diabetes People over 60 years of age, and people of Asian, African or Caribbean descent are also at a higher risk of having a TIA. Read more about the causes of TIA. How TIAs are treated Although the symptoms of a TIA resolve in a few minutes or hours, you will need treatment to help prevent another TIA or a full stroke happening in the future. Your treatment will depend on your individual circumstances, such as your age and medical history. You are likely to be given advice about lifestyle changes you can make to reduce your stroke risk (see below), in addition to being offered medication to treat the underlying cause of your TIA. In some cases, surgery may be needed to unblock the carotid arteries (the main blood vessels that supply the brain with blood). Read more about treating a TIA. Preventing TIAs A TIA is often a sign that another one may follow and you are at a high risk of having a full, life-threatening stroke in the near future. Regardless of whether or not you have had a TIA or stroke in the past, there are a number of ways you can lower your risk of having either in the future. These include: maintaining a healthy weight eating healthily taking regular exercise limiting your alcohol consumption not smoking Read more about how lifestyle factors can help to prevent a TIA. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/10\/2014 Next review due: 15\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1284 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 699  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 348  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 134  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, a consultant stroke physician explains what causes TIA and how to spot the symptoms. Also find out how Sally coped when she had multiple TIAs. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Stroke Atherosclerosis High blood pressure High cholesterol NHS Health Check External links Brain & Spine Foundation: TIA NICE: stroke and TIA Stroke: Act F.A.S.T. Stroke Association Stroke A stroke occurs when the blood supply to part of the brain is cut off. It's a serious condition that should be treated as a medical emergency Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"TIBC or transferrin test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/TIBC-test","content":"Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) test  - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC or transferrin) test   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview TIBC test Introduction  A total iron-binding capacity (TIBC or transferrin) test is used to measure the amount of iron in the body. Transferrin is a glyco-protein that's found in blood plasma (the liquid part of blood). It's capable of binding iron and acts as a carrier for iron in the bloodstream. If you have an iron deficiency (a lack of iron in your blood), your iron level will be low but your TIBC will be high. If you have too much iron \u2013 for example, if you have a condition such as haemochromatosis, your iron level will be high but your TIBC will be low or normal. As transferrin is produced by the liver, your TIBC level will also be low if you have liver disease. Read more about the TIBC test at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 7 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Iron deficiency External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tic douloureux","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/trigeminal-neuralgia","content":"Trigeminal neuralgia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trigeminal neuralgia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trigeminal-neuralgia Community Trigeminal neuralgia Trigeminal-neuralgia Symptoms Trigeminal-neuralgia Causes Trigeminal-neuralgia Diagnosis Trigeminal-neuralgia Treatment Introduction  Trigeminal neuralgia is a sudden, severe facial pain, described as sharp, shooting or like an electric shock. It usually occurs in sudden short attacks lasting from a few seconds to about two minutes, which stop just as abruptly. In the vast majority of cases it affects part or all of one side of the face, with the pain most commonly felt in the lower part of the face. Very occasionally it affects both sides of the face, but not normally at the same time. People with the condition may experience attacks of pain regularly for days, weeks or months at a time. In severe cases, attacks may occur hundreds of times a day. It's possible for the pain to improve or even disappear altogether for several months or years at a time (known as a period of remission), although these periods of remission tend to get shorter with time. Some people may then go on to develop a more continuous aching, throbbing and burning sensation, sometimes accompanied by the sharp attacks. Typically, the attacks of pain are brought on by activities that involve lightly touching the face, such as washing, eating and brushing the teeth, but they can also be triggered by wind (even a slight breeze or air conditioning) or movement of the face or head. Sometimes, the pain can occur without any trigger whatsoever. Living with trigeminal neuralgia can be very difficult and it can have a significant impact on a person's quality of life, resulting in problems such as weight loss, isolation and depression. Read more about the symptoms of trigeminal neuralgia. When to seek medical advice You should see your GP if you experience frequent or persistent facial pain, particularly if standard painkillers such as paracetamol and ibuprofen do not help and a dentist has ruled out any dental causes. Your GP will try to identify the problem by asking about your symptoms and ruling out conditions that could be responsible for your pain. However, diagnosing trigeminal neuralgia can be difficult, and it can take a few years for a diagnosis to be confirmed. Read more about diagnosing trigeminal neuralgia. What causes trigeminal neuralgia? In the vast majority of cases, trigeminal neuralgia is caused by compression of the trigeminal nerve. This is the largest nerve inside the skull, which transmits sensations of pain and touch from your face, teeth and mouth to your brain. This compression is usually caused by a nearby blood vessel pressing on part of the nerve inside the skull. In rare cases, trigeminal neuralgia can occur as a result of damage to the trigeminal nerve, caused by an underlying condition such as multiple sclerosis (MS) or a tumour. Read more about the causes of trigeminal neuralgia. Who is affected It's not clear exactly how many people are affected by trigeminal neuralgia, but the condition is thought to be rare. Some studies have suggested that around 27 in every 100,000 people are diagnosed with the condition in the UK each year, although this figure is probably too high as the condition tends to be over-diagnosed by doctors. Other estimates have suggested that there are about 6,500 new cases diagnosed each year in the UK. The condition affects women more often than men and is rare in people under the age of 40, although it can occur in younger people. Most cases are first seen in people between the ages of 50 and 60. How trigeminal neuralgia is treated Trigeminal neuralgia is usually a long-term condition, and the periods of remission often get shorter over time. However, most cases can be controlled to at least some degree with treatment. The first treatment offered will usually be with an anticonvulsant medication (usually used to treat epilepsy) called carbamazepine. To be effective, this medication needs to be taken several times a day, with the dose gradually increased over the course of a few days or weeks so that high enough levels of the medication can build up in your bloodstream. Unless your pain starts to diminish or disappears altogether, the medication is usually continued for as long as is necessary, sometimes for many years. If you are entering a period of remission and your pain goes away, stopping the medication should always be done slowly over days or weeks, unless you are advised otherwise by a doctor. Carbamazepine was not originally designed to treat pain, but it can help relieve nerve pain by slowing down electrical impulses in the nerves and reducing their ability to transmit pain messages. If this medication is ineffective, unsuitable or causes too many side effects, you may be referred to a specialist to discuss alternative medications or surgical procedures that may help. There are a number of minor surgical procedures that can be used to treat trigeminal neuralgia \u2013 usually by damaging the nerve to stop it sending pain signals \u2013 but these are generally only effective for a few years. Alternatively, your specialist may recommend having surgery to open up your skull and move away any blood vessels compressing the trigeminal nerve. Research suggests this operation offers the best results in terms of long-term pain relief, but it is a major operation and carries a risk of potentially serious complications, such as hearing loss, facial numbness or, very rarely, a stroke. Read more about treating trigeminal neuralgia. Postherpetic neuralgia This article focuses on trigeminal neuralgia, a rare type of neuralgia most commonly seen in people between the ages of 50 and 60. Postherpetic neuralgia is a more common type of neuralgia that usually develops after a previous shingles infection. Read more about postherpetic neuralgia. Page last reviewed: 22\/07\/2014 Next review due: 22\/07\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 339 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 159  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with pain MRI scan Multiple sclerosis Postherpetic neuralgia External links Brain & Spine Foundation: face pain NINDS: trigeminal neuralgia The Pain Toolkit Trigeminal Neuralgia Association UK How to get NHS help for long-term pain Find out how to get help from your GP or local hospital if you have persistent pain Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tick bites","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Bites-insect","content":"Insect bites and stings - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Insect bites and stings  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Bites-insect Clinical trials Insect bites and stings Bites-insect Symptoms Bites-insect Treatment Bites-insect Prevention   Most insect bites and stings are not serious and will get better within a few hours or days. But occasionally they can become infected, cause a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) or spread serious illnesses such as Lyme disease and malaria. Bugs that bite or sting include wasps, hornets, bees, horseflies, ticks, mosquitoes, fleas, bedbugs, spiders and midges. This page covers: Symptoms What to do if you've been bitten or stung When to get medical advice When to get emergency medical help Prevention Symptoms of insect bites and stings Insect bites and stings will usually cause a red, swollen lump to develop on the skin. This may be painful and in some cases can be very itchy. The symptoms will normally improve within a few hours or days, although sometimes they can last a little longer. Some people have a mild allergic reaction and a larger area of skin around the bite or sting becomes swollen, red and painful. This should pass within a week. Occasionally, a severe allergic reaction can occur, causing symptoms such as breathing difficulties, dizziness and a swollen face or mouth. This requires immediate medical treatment (see below). Read more about the symptoms of common insect bites and stings. What to do if you've been bitten or stung To treat an insect bite or sting: Remove the sting or tick if it's still in the skin (see treating insect bites and stings for advice about how to do this safely). Wash the affected area with soap and water. Apply a cold compress (such as a flannel or cloth cooled with cold water) or an ice pack to any swelling for at least 10 minutes. Raise or elevate the affected area if possible, as this can help reduce swelling. Avoid scratching the area, to reduce the risk of infection. Avoid traditional home remedies, such as vinegar and bicarbonate of soda, as they're unlikely to help. The pain, swelling and itchiness can sometimes last a few days. Ask your pharmacist about over-the-counter treatments that can help, such as painkillers, creams for itching and antihistamines. Read more about treatments for insect bites and stings. When to get medical advice Contact your GP or call NHS 111 for advice if: you're worried about a bite or sting your symptoms don't start to improve within a few days or are getting worse you've been stung or bitten in your mouth or throat, or near your eyes a large area (around 10cm or more) around the bite becomes red and swollen you have symptoms of a wound infection, such as pus or increasing pain, swelling or redness you have symptoms of a more widespread infection, such as a fever, swollen glands and other flu-like symptoms When to get emergency medical help Dial 999 for an ambulance immediately if you or someone else has symptoms of a severe reaction, such as: wheezing or difficulty breathing a swollen face, mouth or throat nausea or vomiting a fast heart rate dizziness or feeling faint difficulty swallowing loss of consciousness Emergency treatment in hospital is needed in these cases. Prevent insect bites and stings There are some simple precautions you can take to reduce your risk of being bitten or stung by insects. For example, you should: Remain calm and move away slowly if you encounter wasps, hornets or bees \u2013 don't wave your arms around or swat at them. Cover exposed skin by wearing long sleeves and trousers. Wear shoes when outdoors. Apply insect repellent to exposed skin \u2013 repellents that contain 50% DEET (diethyltoluamide) are most effective. Avoid using products with strong perfumes, such as soaps, shampoos and deodorants \u2013 these can attract insects. Be careful around flowering plants, rubbish, compost, stagnant water, and in outdoor areas where food is served. You may need to take extra precautions if you're travelling to part of the world where there's a risk of serious illnesses. For example, you may be advised to take antimalarial tablets to help prevent malaria. Read more about how to prevent insect bites and stings. Page last reviewed: 01\/07\/2016 Next review due: 01\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 751 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 233  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 92  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 208  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Lyme disease Malaria Bedbugs Allergies External links NHS Fit for Travel: destination advice Plant dangers in the garden and countryside Keep your family safe with this guide to plant hazards, and find out what to do if someone is affected Malaria Approximately 1,500 travellers return to the UK with malaria every year. Find out more about the symptoms and causes, and how you can protect yourself NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Lyme disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Lyme-disease","content":"Lyme disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Lyme disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Lyme-disease Clinical trials Lyme disease   Lyme disease, or Lyme borreliosis, is a bacterial infection spread to humans by infected ticks. Ticks are tiny spider-like creatures found in woodland and heath areas. They feed on the blood of birds and mammals, including humans. Ticks that carry the bacteria responsible for Lyme disease are found throughout the UK and in other parts of Europe and North America. It's estimated there are 2,000 to 3,000 new cases of Lyme disease in England and Wales each year. About 15% of cases occur while people are abroad. Lyme disease can often be treated effectively if it's detected early on. But if it's not treated or treatment is delayed, there's a risk you could develop severe and long-lasting symptoms. This page covers: Signs and symptoms of Lyme disease When to see your GP How you get Lyme disease Who's at risk and where are ticks found? Treating Lyme disease Preventing Lyme disease How to remove a tick Chronic Lyme disease Further information Signs and symptoms of Lyme disease Early symptoms Many people with early-stage Lyme disease develop a distinctive circular rash at the site of the tick bite, usually around three to 30 days after being bitten. This is known as erythema migrans. The rash is often described as looking like a bull's-eye on a dart board. The affected area of skin will be red and the edges may feel slightly raised. The size of the rash can vary significantly and it may expand over several days or weeks. Typically it's around 15cm (6 inches) across, but it can be much larger or smaller than this. Some people may develop several rashes in different parts of their body. However, around one in three people with Lyme disease won't develop this rash. Some people with Lyme disease also experience flu-like symptoms in the early stages, such as tiredness (fatigue), muscle pain, joint pain, headaches, a high temperature (fever), chills and neck stiffness.  Later symptoms More serious symptoms may develop several weeks, months or even years later if Lyme disease is left untreated or is not treated early on. These can include: pain and swelling in the joints (inflammatory arthritis) problems affecting the nervous system \u2013 such as numbness and pain in your limbs, paralysis of your facial muscles, memory problems and difficulty concentrating heart problems \u2013 such as inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis) or sac surrounding the heart (pericarditis), heart block and heart failure inflammation of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) \u2013 which can cause a severe headache, a stiff neck and increased sensitivity to light Some of these problems will get better slowly with treatment, although they can persist if treatment is started late. A few people with Lyme disease go on to develop long-term symptoms similar to those of fibromyalgia or chronic fatigue syndrome. This is known as post-infectious Lyme disease. It's not clear exactly why this happens, but it's likely to be related to overactivity of your immune system rather than persistent infection. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you develop any of the symptoms described above after being bitten by a tick, or if you think you may have been bitten. Make sure you let your GP know if you've spent time in woodland or heath areas where ticks are known to live. Diagnosing Lyme disease is often difficult as many of the symptoms are similar to other conditions. A spreading rash some days after a known tick bite should be treated with appropriate antibiotics without waiting for the results of a blood test. Blood tests can be carried out to confirm the diagnosis after a few weeks, but these can be negative in the early stages of the infection. You may need to be re-tested if Lyme disease is still suspected after a negative test result. In the UK, two types of blood test are used to ensure Lyme disease is diagnosed accurately. This is because a single blood test can sometimes produce a positive result even when a person doesn't have the infection. If you have post-infectious Lyme disease or long-lasting symptoms, you may see a specialist in microbiology or infectious diseases. They can arrange for blood samples to be sent to the national reference laboratory run by Public Health England (PHE), where further tests for other tick-borne infections can be carried out. How you get Lyme disease If a tick bites an animal carrying the bacteria that cause Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi), the tick can also become infected. The tick can then transfer the bacteria to a human by biting them. Ticks can be found in any areas with deep or overgrown vegetation where they have access to animals to feed on. They're common in woodland and heath areas, but can also be found in gardens or parks. Ticks don't jump or fly, but climb on to your clothes or skin if you brush against something they're on. They then bite into the skin and start to feed on your blood. Generally, you're more likely to become infected if the tick remains attached to your skin for more than 24 hours. But ticks are very small and their bites are not painful, so you may not realise you have one attached to your skin. Who's at risk and where are ticks found? People who spend time in woodland or heath areas in the UK and parts of Europe or North America are most at risk of developing Lyme disease. Most tick bites happen in late spring, early summer and autumn because these are the times of year when most people take part in outdoor activities, such as hiking and camping. Cases of Lyme disease have been reported throughout the UK, but areas known to have a particularly high population of ticks include: Exmoor the New Forest and other rural areas of Hampshire the South Downs parts of Wiltshire and Berkshire parts of Surrey and West Sussex Thetford Forest in Norfolk the Lake District the North York Moors the Scottish Highlands It's thought only a small proportion of ticks carry the bacteria that cause Lyme disease, so being bitten doesn't mean you'll definitely be infected. However, it's important to be aware of the risk and seek medical advice if you start to feel unwell. Treating Lyme disease If you develop symptoms of Lyme disease, you will normally be given a course of antibiotic tablets, capsules or liquid. Most people will require a two- to four-week course, depending on the stage of the condition. If you are prescribed antibiotics, it's important you finish the course even if you are feeling better, because this will help ensure all the bacteria are killed. If your symptoms are particularly severe, you may be referred to a specialist to have antibiotic injections (intravenous antibiotics). Some of the antibiotics used to treat Lyme disease can make your skin more sensitive to sunlight. In these cases, you should avoid prolonged exposure to the sun and not use sunbeds until after you have finished the treatment. There's currently no clear consensus on the best treatment for post-infectious Lyme disease because the underlying cause is not yet clear. Be wary of internet sites offering alternative diagnostic tests and treatments that may not be supported by scientific evidence. Preventing Lyme disease There is currently no vaccine available to prevent Lyme disease. The best way to prevent the condition is to be aware of the risks when you visit areas where ticks are found and to take sensible precautions. You can reduce the risk of infection by: keeping to footpaths and avoiding long grass when out walking wearing appropriate clothing in tick-infested areas (a long-sleeved shirt and trousers tucked into your socks) wearing light-coloured fabrics that may help you spot a tick on your clothes using insect repellent on exposed skin inspecting your skin for ticks, particularly at the end of the day, including your head, neck and skin folds (armpits, groin, and waistband) \u2013 remove any ticks you find promptly checking your children's head and neck areas, including their scalp making sure ticks are not brought home on your clothes checking that pets do not bring ticks into your home in their fur How to remove a tick If you find a tick on your or your child's skin, remove it by gently gripping it as close to the skin as possible, preferably using fine-toothed tweezers. Pull steadily away from the skin without twisting or crushing the tick. Wash your skin with water and soap afterwards, and apply an antiseptic cream to the skin around the bite. Don't use a lit cigarette end, a match head or substances such as alcohol or petroleum jelly to force the tick out. Some veterinary surgeries and pet shops sell inexpensive tick removal devices, which may be useful if you frequently spend time in areas where there are ticks. \"Chronic Lyme disease\" There has recently been a lot of focus on Lyme disease in the media, with much attention on people who've been diagnosed with \"chronic Lyme disease\". This term has been used by some people to describe persistent symptoms such as tiredness, aches and pains, usually in the absence of a confirmed Lyme disease infection. It's different to \"post-infectious Lyme disease\" (see above), which is used to describe persistent symptoms after a confirmed and treated infection. It's important to be aware that a diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease is controversial. Experts do not agree on whether the condition exists, or whether the symptoms are actually caused by a different, undiagnosed problem. In either case, there's no evidence to suggest people diagnosed with chronic Lyme disease can pass the condition on to others, and there's little clear evidence about how best to treat it. Further information Public Health England: Lyme disease: guidance, data and analysis Public Health England: Lyme disease signs and symptoms (PDF, 335kb) Page last reviewed: 31\/03\/2015 Next review due: 31\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1474 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 601  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 375  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 130  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 279  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Insect bites and stings Travel health External links Fit for Travel: Lyme disease Lab Tests Online UK: Lyme disease tests Lyme Disease Action Public Health England: ticks and your health (PDF, 320kb) Public Health England: Lyme disease: guidance, data and analysis Public Health England: Lyme disease signs and symptoms Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Find and choose services for Lyme disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tick-borne encephalitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tick-borne-encephalitis","content":"Tick-borne encephalitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tick-borne encephalitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tick-borne-encephalitis Clinical trials Tick-borne-encephalitis Tick-borne encephalitis Tick-borne-encephalitis Symptoms Tick-borne-encephalitis Complications Tick-borne-encephalitis Prevention Introduction  Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is a viral infection spread to humans by the bite of a small spider-like parasite called a tick. It's a rare infection that's only acquired abroad in certain European and Asian countries (see 'Risk areas' below). Initial symptoms of TBE are similar to flu and can include: a high temperature (fever) a headache  tiredness  muscle pain These symptoms usually last for up to eight days, after which point most people make a full recovery. However, some people go on to develop more serious symptoms caused by the virus spreading to the protective layer of tissue that covers the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) or the brain itself (encephalitis). These 'second-stage' symptoms can include: changes in mental state, such as confusion, drowsiness or disorientation seizures (fits) sensitivity to bright light (photophobia) being unable to speak paralysis (inability to move certain body parts) If TBE reaches this stage, you'll usually need to be admitted to hospital. These symptoms tend to get slowly better over a few weeks, but it may take several months or years to make a full recovery and there's a risk you could experience long-term complications (see below). Around one in every 100 cases of TBE is fatal. Read more about the symptoms of tick-borne encephalitis. When to seek medical help Contact your GP if you've returned from an area of the world known to have cases of TBE (see below), and you start to experience flu-like symptoms. You should seek medical advice as soon as possible if you've been bitten by a tick while in a risk area and you haven't been vaccinated against TBE, or if you develop a rash or fever after being bitten. The advanced stages of TBE need emergency treatment in hospital. Call 999 (or the equivalent number where you're staying) immediately and ask for an ambulance if you have flu-like symptoms that are getting rapidly worse and affecting your mental state. Risk areas The TBE virus isn't present in the UK, so there's no risk of infection within the UK. However, cases of infection can occur among travellers returning from countries within Europe and Asia where TBE-infected ticks are found. Infected ticks are mainly found in rural areas of central, northern and eastern Europe. There are also two sub-types of TBE found in eastern Russia and in some countries in East Asia, particularly forested regions of China and Japan. Visit Travel Health Pro for a map showing the areas where infected ticks are found. How the infection is spread Ticks are found in forests, woods, grasslands, riverside meadows, marshes, brushwood and scrublands. They usually live in the undergrowth, where they can easily get onto people's clothes or skin. You can become infected with TBE if you're bitten by an infected tick. The virus is present in the tick\u2019s saliva, which also contains a natural anaesthetic so you may not notice you've been bitten. You can be bitten by an infected tick at any time of year, but tick activity is at its highest during the Spring and early Summer.  Drinking unpasteurised milk and eating unpasteurised dairy products from infected animals, particularly goats, can expose you to the TBE virus. However, this is rare. How common is tick-borne encephalitis? Very few cases of TBE have been reported in the UK, with just nine cases diagnosed in 2013\/14. However, TBE is fairly common in areas where infected ticks are found, so it's important to take steps to reduce your risk of infection (see below). The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that between 10,000 and 12,000 cases of TBE are reported worldwide each year. However, the actual number of cases is thought to be much higher than this because it's likely that many cases aren't reported. How tick-borne encephalitis is treated If a doctor thinks you may have TBE, they'll carry out a blood test or lumbar puncture (where a sample of spinal fluid is removed) to confirm whether you're infected. There's currently no cure for TBE, so treatment aims to help relieve symptoms until the infection passes. If you only experience the initial symptoms of TBE, no treatment is required other than taking painkillers, such as ibuprofen or paracetamol, to help relieve your symptoms. You'll usually be admitted to hospital if you develop second-stage symptoms. In hospital you'll receive fluids into a vein (intravenous fluids), help with breathing and nursing care.  Read more about treating viral meningitis and treating encephalitis. Possible complications If you develop second-stage symptoms of TBE caused by the infection spreading to the brain, there's a risk you could experience long-term (and possibly permanent) complications, such as: memory problems problems concentrating and a short attention span behavioural changes, such as becoming more impulsive and having poor judgement These types of long-term effects occur in more than one in 10 people who develop symptoms of TBE. Read more about the complications of tick-borne encephalitis. Preventing tick-borne encephalitis The best way to prevent TBE is to be vaccinated against the infection before you travel if you're going to be working or travelling in a part of the world where there's a risk of TBE, particularly if you're planning to visit rural areas or go hiking or camping. The vaccine, which is only available privately, provides protection against TBE in around nine out of every 10 people who receive it. Even if you've been vaccinated, you should still take precautions to reduce your risk of being bitten by an infected tick. For example, you should: wear long-sleeved tops and trousers tucked into your socks apply insect repellent containing DEET to exposed skin regularly check for ticks \u2013 common places to find them are around the hair line, behind the ears, on or around the elbows, the backs of the knees, the groin and the armpits Read more about preventing tick-borne encephalitis. Ticks in the UK You should also be aware that tick bites can spread other illnesses, such as Lyme disease, which you can get after being bitten by a tick in the UK. Therefore, follow the advice above to avoid tick bites when you and your family are in areas of the UK where ticks are commonly found.  Accessing healthcare abroad It's a good idea to keep a list of important telephone numbers with you when travelling abroad. These should include numbers for: the local emergency services a representative of the travel company you booked your visit with your travel insurer the British consulate or embassy in the area you're visiting \u2013 GOV.UK has a directory of British consulates and embassies You should also apply for a free European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) before travelling to Europe because it may give you access to reduced-cost medical treatment. Read more about accessing healthcare abroad. Page last reviewed: 09\/12\/2015 Next review due: 09\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 55 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Encephalitis Healthcare abroad Travel insurance Travel vaccinations External links Encephalitis Society Fit for Travel GOV.UK: foreign travel advice Travel Health Pro Encephalitis Read about encephalitis, a rare but serious condition that causes inflammation of the brain Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tics","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tics","content":"Tics - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tics  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tics Clinical trials Tics Tics Types Tics Treatment Introduction  Tics are rapid, repetitive, involuntary contractions of a group of muscles. Although they're rarely harmful, some tics can severely interfere with daily life. Tics may occur as either: motor tics (bodily movements) \u2013 such as facial twitching or shrugging the shoulders phonic or vocal tics (sounds) \u2013 such as grunting, clearing the throat or sniffing Tics can also be described as simple or complex. Simple tics, such as blinking or coughing, tend to happen quickly and may not even be noticeable. Complex tics, such as facial grimacing or repeating a sound, tend to be slower and may appear intentional. Read more about different types of tics. When tics happen Tics can start with a feeling of tension that builds up inside you (a premonitory urge). Some people also describe this as a hot, itchy or generally unpleasant sensation you want to get rid of. The sensation increases if you try to prevent the tic. After you've made the movement or sound, you may feel a sense of relief until the need to tic begins again. Tics usually stop during sleep, although they can sometimes persist. They also tend to be less frequent when you're deeply absorbed in an activity. Stress and anxiety can often make tics worse. They can also be worse when you're tired, excited or self-conscious about your tic being noticed. When to see your GP You should visit your GP if you or your child develops a tic and they: occur regularly or become more frequent or severe are associated with emotional problems or physical discomfort are accompanied by other worrying moods or behaviours, such as anger, depression or self-harm Your GP should be able to diagnose a tic from a description of the movements and by observing them. Special tests aren't usually required. If possible, it can be helpful to record the movements on video to show your GP. What causes tics? It's not clear exactly what causes tics, although they're known to be related to the parts of the brain that control movement. Tics often appear to run in families, so there may be a genetic reason why they develop. Less commonly, tics may be caused by other health conditions, such as: cerebral palsy Huntington's disease any disease affecting an artery in the brain or supplying blood to the brain (cerebrovascular disease) Tics can also occur as a result of taking recreational drugs, such as cocaine or amphetamines, or when you stop taking drugs (as a withdrawal symptom). Most tics start during childhood. People who have them experience periods when they're better and periods when they're worse. For many people, tics are only temporary and they tend to improve during the late teenage years or early adulthood. Treating tics If you have a mild tic, you may decide that treatment isn't necessary. However, a number of different options are available. Behavioural therapies are often recommended as a first-choice treatment for tics. They include: Habit reversal therapy (HRT) \u2013 which aims to help you learn \"responses\" (other movements) that \"compete\" with tics, meaning the tic can't happen at the same time. HRT teaches you to use these competing responses when you get the feeling you need to tic, until the feeling goes away. Exposure with response prevention (ERP) \u2013 which aims to help you get used to the overwhelming unpleasant feelings that are often experienced just before a tic. There are also a number of medicines that can improve tics in some people. Sometimes, medicine is also prescribed for associated symptoms that some people with tics report. These can include inattentiveness, hyperactivity or anxiety. In particularly severe and rare adult cases, a type of surgery called deep brain stimulation may be used. Read more about treating tics. Complications Although tics often improve over time, they can be associated with social problems or affect performance at school or work. This can have a significant impact on a person's quality of life. Social problems If your child has a tic, it may be helpful to develop ways for them to explain their tics to other children who ask about them. This may help your child to deal with their tics and reduce any stress and anxiety they're feeling. In some cases, someone with a tic may feel bullied, which can be difficult to cope with. Read the section on bullying for help if you're being bullied. School and work Tics can emerge as a problem when your child is under extra pressure \u2013 for example, when they're studying for exams. This type of stressful situation can make the tics seem worse, especially if they come and go. If your child is finding work difficult, talk to their teacher about possible ways of dealing with it. For example, being allowed \"time out\" to leave the classroom if their tics are particularly bad and they need a break to help them concentrate more in class. Similarly, if you have a tic that's making things difficult for you at work, speak to your employer to find out whether any additional help and support is available. Tourette's syndrome Tourette's syndrome is a condition where both motor and phonic tics are experienced over at least 12 months. It's a relatively common condition in the UK, affecting around 1 in 100 children. Read about Tourette's syndrome. Page last reviewed: 22\/01\/2015 Next review due: 22\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 129 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Tourette's syndrome Psychotherapy ADHD Obsessive compulsive disorder External links Tourettes Action OCD Action Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress Breathing exercise for stress This calming breathing technique for stress, anxiety and panic takes just a few minutes and can be done anywhere Talking therapies explained A guide to the different types of talking therapy and how they can help you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tietze's syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tietzes-syndrome","content":"Costochondritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Costochondritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Costochondritis   Costochondritis is the medical term for inflammation of the cartilage that joins your ribs to your breastbone (sternum). This area is known as the costochondral joint. Cartilage is tough but flexible connective tissue found throughout the body, including in the joints between bones. It acts as a shock absorber, cushioning the joints. Costochondritis may improve on its own after a few weeks, although it can last for several months or more. The condition doesn't lead to any permanent problems, but may sometimes relapse. Tietze's syndrome Costochondritis may be confused with a separate condition called Tietze's syndrome. Both conditions involve inflammation of the costochondral joint and can cause very similar symptoms. However, Tietze's syndrome is much less common and often causes chest swelling, which may last after any pain and tenderness has gone. Costochondritis also tends to affect adults aged 40 or over, whereas Tietze's syndrome usually affects young adults under 40. As the conditions are very similar, most of the information below also applies to Tietze's syndrome. Signs and symptoms When the costochondral joint becomes inflamed it can result in sharp chest pain and tenderness, which may develop gradually or start suddenly. The pain may be made worse by: a particular posture \u2013 such as lying down pressure on your chest \u2013 such as wearing a seatbelt or hugging someone deep breathing, coughing and sneezing physical activity When to seek medical help It can be difficult to tell the difference between the chest pain associated with costochondritis and pain caused by more serious conditions, such as a heart attack. However, a heart attack usually causes more widespread pain and additional symptoms, such as breathlessness, nausea and sweating. If you, or someone you're with, experiences sudden chest pain and you think there's a possibility it could be a heart attack, dial 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance. If you've had chest pain for a while, don't ignore it. Make an appointment to see your GP so they can investigate the cause. Causes of costochondritis Inflammation is the body's natural response to infection, irritation or injury. It's not known exactly why the costochondral joint becomes inflamed, but in some cases it's been linked to: severe coughing \u2013 which strains your chest area an injury to your chest physical strain from repeated exercise or sudden exertion that you're not used to \u2013 such as moving furniture an infection \u2013 including respiratory tract infections (RTIs) and wound infections wear and tear \u2013 your chest moves in and out 20 to 30 times a minute, and over time this motion can lead to discomfort in these joints Diagnosing costochondritis If you have symptoms of costochondritis, your GP will examine and touch the upper chest area around your costochondral joint. They'll ask you when and where your pain occurs and look at your recent medical history. Before a diagnosis can be confirmed, some tests may need to be carried out to rule out other possible causes of your chest pain. These may include: an electrocardiogram (ECG) \u2013 which records the rhythms and electrical activity of your heart a blood test to check for signs of underlying inflammation a chest X-ray If no other condition is suspected or found, a diagnosis of costrochondritis may be made. Treating costochondritis Costochondritis often gets better after a few weeks, but self-help measures and medication can manage the symptoms. Self-help Costochondritis can be aggravated by any activity that places stress on your chest area, such as strenuous exercise or even simple movements like reaching up to a high cupboard. Any activity that makes the pain in your chest area worse should be avoided until the inflammation in your ribs and cartilage has improved. You may also find it soothing to regularly apply heat to the painful area \u2013 for example, using a cloth or flannel that's been warmed with hot water. Painkillers Painkillers, such as paracetamol, can be used to ease mild to moderate pain. Taking a type of medication called a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) \u2013 such as ibuprofen and naproxen \u2013 two or three times a day can also help control the pain and swelling.  Aspirin is also a suitable alternative, but shouldn't be given to children under 16 years old. These medications are available from pharmacies without a prescription, but you should make sure you carefully read the instructions that come with them before use. NSAIDs aren't suitable for people with certain health conditions, including: asthma stomach ulcers high blood pressure kidney or heart problems Contact your GP if your symptoms get worse despite resting and taking painkillers, as you may benefit from treatment with corticosteroids.  Corticosteroid injections Corticosteroids are powerful medicines that can help reduce pain and swelling. They can be injected into and around your costochondral joint to help relieve the symptoms of costochondritis. Corticosteroid injections may be recommended if your pain is severe, or if NSAIDs are unsuitable or ineffective. They may be given by your GP, or you may need to be referred to a specialist called a rheumatologist. Having too many corticosteroid injections can damage your costochondral joint, so you may only be able to have this type of treatment once every few months if you continue to experience pain. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) TENS is a method of pain relief where a mild electric current is delivered to the affected area using a small, battery-operated device.  The electrical impulses can reduce the pain signals going to the spinal cord and brain, which may help relieve pain and relax muscles. They may also stimulate the production of endorphins, which are the body's natural painkillers. Although TENS may be used to help relieve pain in a wide range of conditions, it doesn't work for everyone. There isn't enough good-quality scientific evidence to say for sure whether TENS is a reliable method of pain relief. Speak to your GP if you're considering TENS. Read more about transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1262 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 704  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 306  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cartilage damage Chest pain Corticosteroids Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Pharmacy and medicines External links The British Pain Society Chest pain Find out about common causes of chest pain, and when you should seek medical advice Medicines out of hours Find out how to access your medicines outside of usual opening hours NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tight foreskin (phimosis)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/phimosis","content":"Tight foreskin (phimosis and paraphimosis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tight foreskin (phimosis and paraphimosis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phimosis and paraphimosis (tight foreskin) Introduction  Phimosis is a condition where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis (glans). Phimosis is normal in babies and toddlers, but in older children it may be the result of a skin condition that has caused scarring. It isn't usually a problem unless it causes symptoms. Immediate treatment is needed in cases where phimosis causes problems such as difficulty urinating. Normal development Most uncircumcised baby boys have a foreskin that won't pull back (retract) because it's still attached to the glans. This is perfectly normal for about the first two to six years. By around the age of two, the foreskin should start to separate naturally from the glans. The foreskin of some boys can take longer to separate, but this doesn't mean there's a problem \u2013 it will just detach at a later stage. Never try to force your child's foreskin back before it's ready because it may be painful and damage the foreskin. When phimosis is a problem Phimosis isn't usually a problem unless it causes symptoms such as redness, soreness or swelling. If your child's glans is sore and inflamed they may have balanitis (inflammation of the head of the penis). There may also be a thick discharge underneath the foreskin. If both the glans and foreskin are inflamed it's known as balanoposthitis. Take your child to see your GP if they have these type of symptoms. Your GP will be able to recommend appropriate treatment. Most cases of balanitis can be easily managed using a combination of good hygiene, creams or ointments, and avoiding substances that irritate the penis. Read more about treating balanitis. Balanoposthitis can also sometimes be treated by following simple hygiene measures, such as keeping the penis clean by regularly washing it with water and a mild soap or moisturiser. Urine can irritate the glans if it's retained for long periods under the foreskin, so if possible you should withdraw the foreskin to wash the glans. If balanoposthitis is caused by a fungal or bacterial infection, an antifungal cream or a course of antibiotics may be needed. In adults, phimosis can occasionally be associated with sexually transmitted infections (STIs). It can also be caused by a number of different skin conditions including: eczema \u2013 a long-term condition that causes the skin to become itchy, red, dry and cracked psoriasis \u2013 a skin condition that causes red, flaky, crusty patches of skin covered with silvery scales lichen planus \u2013 a non-infectious itchy rash that can affect many areas of the body lichen sclerosus \u2013 a scarring condition of the foreskin (and sometimes glans) that's probably caused by urinary irritation in susceptible men and boys Topical steroids (a cream, gel or ointment that contains corticosteroids) are sometimes prescribed to treat a tight foreskin. They can help soften the skin of the foreskin, making it easier to retract. Phimosis can cause pain, skin splitting, or a lack of sensation during sex. Using a condom and lubricants while having sex may make your penis more comfortable. When surgery may be needed Surgery may be needed if a child or adult has severe or persistent balanitis or balanoposthitis that causes their foreskin to be painfully tight. Circumcision (surgically removing part or all of the foreskin) may be considered if other treatments have failed, but it carries risks such as bleeding and infection. Therefore, it's usually only recommended as a last resort, although it can sometimes be the best and only treatment option.  Alternatively, surgery to release the adhesions (areas where the foreskin is stuck to the glans) may be possible. This will preserve the foreskin but may not always prevent the problem recurring. Paraphimosis Paraphimosis is where the foreskin can't be returned to its original position after being retracted. It causes the glans to become painful and swollen and requires emergency medical treatment to avoid serious complications, such as increased pain, swelling and restricted blood flow to the penis. It may be possible to reduce the pain and inflammation by applying a local anaesthetic gel to the penis and pressing on the glans while pushing the foreskin forward. In difficult cases, it may be necessary to make a small slit in the foreskin to help relieve the pressure. In severe cases of paraphimosis, circumcision may be recommended. In very severe cases, a lack of blood flow to the penis can cause tissue death (gangrene) and surgical removal of the penis may be necessary. Penis hygiene It's important to clean your penis regularly to avoid problems developing. You should: gently wash your penis with warm water each day while having a bath or showering gently pull back your foreskin (if you have one) and wash underneath; don't pull back the foreskin of a baby or young boy because it could be painful and cause harm use a mild or non-perfumed soap (if you choose to use soap) to reduce the risk of skin irritation avoid using talc and deodorants on your penis because they may cause irritation Circumcised men should also regularly clean their penis with warm water and a mild soap (if you choose to use soap). Read more about how to wash a penis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/08\/2015 Next review due: 26\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 342 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the sore penis information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/sore_penis_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Balanitis Circumcision Penis health Why is my penis smelly and sore? External links BAUS: penis procedures BAUS: tight foreskin Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Men's health 18-39 Health for men aged 18 to 39, including eating well, exercise, how to lose the gut and secrets of a sex doctor Men's health 40-60 Health and fitness tips for men aged 40 to 60, including dealing with a midlife crisis and how to lose weight Men's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information for men aged 60 and over NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tinea capitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ringworm","content":"Ringworm and other fungal infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ringworm and other fungal infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ringworm Clinical trials Ringworm Ringworm Symptoms Ringworm Causes Ringworm Diagnosis Ringworm Treatment Ringworm Prevention Introduction  Ringworm is a common fungal infection that can cause a red or silvery ring-like rash on the skin. Ringworm commonly affects arms and legs, but it can appear almost anywhere on the body. Despite its name, ringworm doesn't have anything to do with worms. Other similar fungal infections can affect the scalp, feet, groin and nails. These fungal infections, medically known as \"tinea\", are not serious and are usually easily treated. However, they are contagious and easily spread. Tinea fungal infections There are different types of tinea fungal infection, based on the affected area of the body: ringworm (tinea corporis) \u2013 affecting the body fungal nail infection (onychomycosis) \u2013 affecting the nails athlete's foot (tinea pedis) \u2013 affecting the feet jock itch (tinea cruris) \u2013 affecting the groin tinea capitis \u2013 affecting the scalp Ringworm usually looks like a round, red or silvery patch of skin that may be scaly, inflamed and itchy, but other fungal infections may present themselves slightly differently. Read more about the symptoms of ringworm and other tinea fungal infections. When to see a doctor See your GP if you or your child has a fungal scalp infection, as it\u2019s treated with antifungal tablets, which are only available on prescription. Symptoms of a fungal scalp infection include small patches of scaly scalp skin (which may be sore), patchy hair loss and itchiness. Other types of fungal infections (including ringworm) are generally treated with antifungal cream from the pharmacy, and you don't need to see a doctor unless it persists. However, pharmacists often prefer children to see a GP to confirm a diagnosis. What\u2019s the cause? Fungal spores are passed between people through direct skin contact and by sharing objects such as towels, hairbrushes and bedding. Athlete\u2019s foot is commonly spread in gym and swimming pool changing rooms. Pets, such as dogs and cats, can have ringworm, and you can catch it by stroking them. Read more about the causes of ringworm. Who is affected? It's estimated that 10-20% of people will have ringworm in their lifetime. Although children are more likely to get this, people of all ages can be affected. Groin infections are more common in young men. Fungal scalp infections (tinea capitis) are most common in children who have not reached puberty, particularly African-Caribbean children and those who live in urban areas. Treatment Most ringworm infections are mild and can be treated using a pharmacy antifungal cream. Scalp infections can be treated with antifungal tablets, sometimes combined with antifungal shampoo. If the skin is irritated or broken, it can lead to other bacterial infections, which may need treatment with antibiotics. Read more about how to treat fungal infections. Stopping it spreading It's important to prevent the infection spreading. You should avoid sharing towels, bedding or clothes with someone with a fungal infection. If you think your pet has ringworm, take it to the vet. If your pet is treated quickly, you\u2019ll be less likely to catch it. If your child has a fungal infection, they can go to school, but you should inform their teacher. In addition to treatment, your child should maintain a good level of personal hygiene to prevent the infection spreading. Read more about how to stop the spread of fungal infections. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the skin problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/skin_problems_a_visual_guide.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Look after your skin Benefit your skin by stopping smoking, plus how to protect your skin against sun damage and more Page last reviewed: 05\/03\/2015 Next review due: 05\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 700 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 386  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 174  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medication Athlete's foot Fungal nail infections External links TeensHealth: ringworm Common skin conditions Facts about some of the most common skin problems, including causes and available treatments NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tinea corporis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/ringworm","content":"Ringworm and other fungal infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ringworm and other fungal infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ringworm Clinical trials Ringworm Ringworm Symptoms Ringworm Causes Ringworm Diagnosis Ringworm Treatment Ringworm Prevention Introduction  Ringworm is a common fungal infection that can cause a red or silvery ring-like rash on the skin. Ringworm commonly affects arms and legs, but it can appear almost anywhere on the body. Despite its name, ringworm doesn't have anything to do with worms. Other similar fungal infections can affect the scalp, feet, groin and nails. These fungal infections, medically known as \"tinea\", are not serious and are usually easily treated. However, they are contagious and easily spread. Tinea fungal infections There are different types of tinea fungal infection, based on the affected area of the body: ringworm (tinea corporis) \u2013 affecting the body fungal nail infection (onychomycosis) \u2013 affecting the nails athlete's foot (tinea pedis) \u2013 affecting the feet jock itch (tinea cruris) \u2013 affecting the groin tinea capitis \u2013 affecting the scalp Ringworm usually looks like a round, red or silvery patch of skin that may be scaly, inflamed and itchy, but other fungal infections may present themselves slightly differently. Read more about the symptoms of ringworm and other tinea fungal infections. When to see a doctor See your GP if you or your child has a fungal scalp infection, as it\u2019s treated with antifungal tablets, which are only available on prescription. Symptoms of a fungal scalp infection include small patches of scaly scalp skin (which may be sore), patchy hair loss and itchiness. Other types of fungal infections (including ringworm) are generally treated with antifungal cream from the pharmacy, and you don't need to see a doctor unless it persists. However, pharmacists often prefer children to see a GP to confirm a diagnosis. What\u2019s the cause? Fungal spores are passed between people through direct skin contact and by sharing objects such as towels, hairbrushes and bedding. Athlete\u2019s foot is commonly spread in gym and swimming pool changing rooms. Pets, such as dogs and cats, can have ringworm, and you can catch it by stroking them. Read more about the causes of ringworm. Who is affected? It's estimated that 10-20% of people will have ringworm in their lifetime. Although children are more likely to get this, people of all ages can be affected. Groin infections are more common in young men. Fungal scalp infections (tinea capitis) are most common in children who have not reached puberty, particularly African-Caribbean children and those who live in urban areas. Treatment Most ringworm infections are mild and can be treated using a pharmacy antifungal cream. Scalp infections can be treated with antifungal tablets, sometimes combined with antifungal shampoo. If the skin is irritated or broken, it can lead to other bacterial infections, which may need treatment with antibiotics. Read more about how to treat fungal infections. Stopping it spreading It's important to prevent the infection spreading. You should avoid sharing towels, bedding or clothes with someone with a fungal infection. If you think your pet has ringworm, take it to the vet. If your pet is treated quickly, you\u2019ll be less likely to catch it. If your child has a fungal infection, they can go to school, but you should inform their teacher. In addition to treatment, your child should maintain a good level of personal hygiene to prevent the infection spreading. Read more about how to stop the spread of fungal infections. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the skin problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/skin_problems_a_visual_guide.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Look after your skin Benefit your skin by stopping smoking, plus how to protect your skin against sun damage and more Page last reviewed: 05\/03\/2015 Next review due: 05\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 700 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 386  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 174  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medication Athlete's foot Fungal nail infections External links TeensHealth: ringworm Common skin conditions Facts about some of the most common skin problems, including causes and available treatments NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tinea cruris","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/ringworm","content":"Ringworm and other fungal infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ringworm and other fungal infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ringworm Clinical trials Ringworm Ringworm Symptoms Ringworm Causes Ringworm Diagnosis Ringworm Treatment Ringworm Prevention Introduction  Ringworm is a common fungal infection that can cause a red or silvery ring-like rash on the skin. Ringworm commonly affects arms and legs, but it can appear almost anywhere on the body. Despite its name, ringworm doesn't have anything to do with worms. Other similar fungal infections can affect the scalp, feet, groin and nails. These fungal infections, medically known as \"tinea\", are not serious and are usually easily treated. However, they are contagious and easily spread. Tinea fungal infections There are different types of tinea fungal infection, based on the affected area of the body: ringworm (tinea corporis) \u2013 affecting the body fungal nail infection (onychomycosis) \u2013 affecting the nails athlete's foot (tinea pedis) \u2013 affecting the feet jock itch (tinea cruris) \u2013 affecting the groin tinea capitis \u2013 affecting the scalp Ringworm usually looks like a round, red or silvery patch of skin that may be scaly, inflamed and itchy, but other fungal infections may present themselves slightly differently. Read more about the symptoms of ringworm and other tinea fungal infections. When to see a doctor See your GP if you or your child has a fungal scalp infection, as it\u2019s treated with antifungal tablets, which are only available on prescription. Symptoms of a fungal scalp infection include small patches of scaly scalp skin (which may be sore), patchy hair loss and itchiness. Other types of fungal infections (including ringworm) are generally treated with antifungal cream from the pharmacy, and you don't need to see a doctor unless it persists. However, pharmacists often prefer children to see a GP to confirm a diagnosis. What\u2019s the cause? Fungal spores are passed between people through direct skin contact and by sharing objects such as towels, hairbrushes and bedding. Athlete\u2019s foot is commonly spread in gym and swimming pool changing rooms. Pets, such as dogs and cats, can have ringworm, and you can catch it by stroking them. Read more about the causes of ringworm. Who is affected? It's estimated that 10-20% of people will have ringworm in their lifetime. Although children are more likely to get this, people of all ages can be affected. Groin infections are more common in young men. Fungal scalp infections (tinea capitis) are most common in children who have not reached puberty, particularly African-Caribbean children and those who live in urban areas. Treatment Most ringworm infections are mild and can be treated using a pharmacy antifungal cream. Scalp infections can be treated with antifungal tablets, sometimes combined with antifungal shampoo. If the skin is irritated or broken, it can lead to other bacterial infections, which may need treatment with antibiotics. Read more about how to treat fungal infections. Stopping it spreading It's important to prevent the infection spreading. You should avoid sharing towels, bedding or clothes with someone with a fungal infection. If you think your pet has ringworm, take it to the vet. If your pet is treated quickly, you\u2019ll be less likely to catch it. If your child has a fungal infection, they can go to school, but you should inform their teacher. In addition to treatment, your child should maintain a good level of personal hygiene to prevent the infection spreading. Read more about how to stop the spread of fungal infections. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the skin problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/skin_problems_a_visual_guide.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Look after your skin Benefit your skin by stopping smoking, plus how to protect your skin against sun damage and more Page last reviewed: 05\/03\/2015 Next review due: 05\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 700 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 386  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 174  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medication Athlete's foot Fungal nail infections External links TeensHealth: ringworm Common skin conditions Facts about some of the most common skin problems, including causes and available treatments NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tinea pedis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Athletes-foot","content":"Athlete's foot - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Athlete's foot  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Athletes-foot Clinical trials Athletes-foot Community Athlete's foot Introduction  Athlete's foot is a rash caused by a fungus that usually appears between the toes. The affected skin may be itchy, red, scaly, dry, cracked or blistered. It's not usually serious, but should be treated to stop it spreading to other parts of the body or other people. Treatment usually involves pharmacy-bought creams, sprays or liquids and good foot hygiene. The medical name for athlete's foot is tinea pedis. Signs and symptoms of athlete's foot Athlete's foot most commonly affects the skin between the toes or on the bottom of the feet. Affected areas of skin may be: dry, red, scaly and flaky white, soggy and cracked itchy sore covered in small blisters The infection can spread around your foot and to your toenails \u2013 read more about fungal nail infections. Scratching the infected skin and then touching other parts of your body can also spread the infection. In severe cases, skin damaged by athlete's foot can become infected with bacteria. This can lead to cellulitis, which causes the skin to become red, hot and swollen. How do you get athlete's foot? Athlete's foot is caused by fungi growing and multiplying on the skin. The fungi that cause the infection thrive in warm, dark and moist places like feet. You're more likely to get athlete's foot if you: don't keep your feet clean and dry wear shoes that cause your feet to get hot and sweaty walk around barefoot in places where fungal infections can spread easily, such as communal showers, locker rooms and gyms share towels, socks and shoes with other people have a weakened immune system have certain other health conditions, such as diabetes Athlete's foot can easily spread to other people by touching infected skin or coming into contact with contaminated surfaces or objects. Treatments for athlete's foot Athlete's foot is unlikely to get better on its own. It can usually be treated using antifungal treatments available from pharmacies without needing to see a GP. Antifungal treatments work by stopping the fungus causing your athlete's foot from growing. They come in creams, sprays, liquids and powders, and are used in the following way: treatment should be applied directly to the affected skin and surrounding area wash and dry the affected skin before applying the treatment, and clean your hands afterwards continue treatment after the rash has cleared, as described in the leaflet that comes with your medicine, to make sure all the fungus has gone Antifungal treatments are similarly effective, although some work faster than others. A pharmacist can recommend an antifungal medicine that's safe for you to use. Not all types are suitable for children, older people, and pregnant or breastfeeding women. If your rash is very sore and itchy, a pharmacist may recommend using a mild steroid cream to ease any discomfort, but this should only be used for a short period and in combination with antifungal treatment. Contact your GP if your athlete's foot doesn't start to improve after a week of treatment, or if it's causing significant pain or discomfort. Your GP may take a small skin sample for testing and recommend stronger antifungal medicines, including tablets. It's also important to practise good foot hygiene during treatment to speed up recovery and prevent athlete's foot returning. Preventing athlete's foot You can reduce your risk of developing athlete's foot by: drying your feet gently but thoroughly after washing them, particularly the areas between your toes wearing cotton socks and roomy shoes made of natural materials such as leather \u2013 this can allow your feet to \"breathe\" wear a fresh pair of socks, tights or stockings every day change your shoes every couple of days \u2013 this allows them to dry out between uses not walking around barefoot in public showers and locker rooms not sharing towels, socks and shoes with other people, and ensuring your towels are washed regularly  using talcum powder on your feet to stop them getting sweaty not using moisturiser between your toes, as this can help fungi multiply If you or your child develops athlete's foot, there's no need to stay off work or school. Follow the advice above to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others. Page last reviewed: 29\/09\/2015 Next review due: 29\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 636 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 315  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 137  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the foot problems information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/foot_problems_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medication Foot health Fungal nail infection Nail abnormalities External links College of Podiatry: athlete's foot Foot health How to keep your feet healthy and choose the right sports shoes, plus what to do if you have smelly feet Fungal nail infection Fungal nail infections can affect part or all of the nail, including the nail plate, nail bed and root of the nail Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tinea versicolor","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pityriasis-versicolor","content":"Pityriasis versicolor - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pityriasis versicolor  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pityriasis-versicolor Clinical trials pityriasis-versicolor Community Pityriasis versicolor Introduction  Pityriasis versicolor, sometimes called tinea versicolor, is a common condition that causes small patches of skin to become scaly and discoloured. The patches may be darker or lighter than your normal skin colour, or may be red or pink. They tend to develop gradually and may join up to form larger patches over time. The areas most often affected by pityriasis versicolor include the trunk (chest and tummy), neck, upper arms and back. Although it may look unpleasant and the patches are sometimes itchy, pityriasis versicolor is harmless. You may still want to see your GP, as it usually only improves with treatment. Your GP can normally diagnose pityriasis versicolor by examining your skin. Why it happens Pityriasis versicolor is caused by a type of yeast called Malassezia. This yeast is found on the skin of over 90% of adults, where it normally lives without causing any problems. However, pityriasis versicolor can develop if this yeast starts to multiply more than usual. It\u2019s not clear exactly why this happens in some people and not in others. Several factors can increase your risk of developing pityriasis versicolor, including: living or staying in a warm, moist environment, including the UK, in the summer sweating excessively (hyperhidrosis) having naturally oily skin being a teenager or in your early 20s Pityriasis versicolor isn't related to poor hygiene. The condition can't be spread from person to person, because most people already have the Malassezia yeast on their skin. It\u2019s estimated that around 1 in every 100 people in the UK has pityriasis versicolor. How pityriasis versicolor is treated Pityriasis versicolor can be treated with antifungal medicines. These are available as shampoos, creams and tablets. Antifungal shampoos Antifungal shampoos (such as ketoconazole or selenium sulphide shampoo) are often the first treatment recommended for pityriasis versicolor. These are available to buy over the counter from pharmacies, or your GP can prescribe them. In most cases, these shampoos need to be applied to the affected areas of skin and left for 5 to 10 minutes before being rinsed off. This usually needs to be repeated every day for 5 to 7 days. You may experience some skin irritation or a burning sensation when using these shampoos, particularly selenium sulphide. It may be helpful to dilute the shampoo with water before applying it. Some people also find the odour of selenium sulphide shampoo unpleasant. Antifungal creams and tablets If only small areas of skin are affected, your GP may prescribe an antifungal cream. These creams usually need to be applied to the affected area of skin once or twice a day for several weeks. Some people experience a burning sensation when they use these antifungal creams, but this is uncommon. If a large area of skin is affected, or other treatments haven\u2019t helped, you may be prescribed antifungal tablets. These usually need to be taken once a day for one to four weeks. Side effects of these tablets are uncommon, although some people experience problems such as rashes, feeling sick and abdominal (tummy) pain while taking them. Outlook Overall, antifungal shampoos, creams and tablets are effective in killing the yeast that causes pityriasis versicolor. However, it can take several weeks or months for your skin to return to its normal colour and, in more persistent cases, treatment may need to be repeated. Recurrences It's common for pityriasis versicolor to come back after treatment, particularly during the summer or during holidays to warm and humid countries. However, you can reduce this likelihood by regularly using the antifungal shampoos mentioned above. For example, continuing to use the shampoo once every two to four weeks after the initial treatment, or once a day for a few days before going on holiday, can help to prevent pityriasis versicolor recurring. As these shampoos are available to buy from pharmacies, you don\u2019t need to see your GP for a prescription if you run out. If you develop pityriasis versicolor again after treatment, you can try treating it yourself with antifungal shampoo, or see your GP for advice and alternative treatments. If you have frequent and severe episodes of pityriasis versicolor, your GP may consider prescribing antifungal tablets to take a few times a month to prevent the condition reoccurring. Pityriasis versicolor or vitiligo? Pityriasis versicolor can sometimes be confused with vitiligo, as they both cause the skin to become discoloured in patches. However, there are many ways to tell the difference: Vitiligo often develops symmetrically (on both sides of your body at the same time), whereas pityriasis versicolor may not. Skin affected by vitiligo usually has a normal texture, whereas areas affected by pityriasis versicolor are usually slightly scaly or flaky. Vitiligo is more common around the mouth, eyes, fingers, wrists, armpits and groin, whereas pityriasis versicolor tends to develop on the chest, tummy, back and upper arms. Read more about vitiligo. Page last reviewed: 20\/07\/2015 Next review due: 20\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 150 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Keep skin healthy Pityriasis rosea Antifungal medicines Hyperhidrosis Pharmacy and medicines External links DermNet NZ: pityriasis versicolor images British Skin Foundation Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes How your pharmacy can help Your local pharmacy is more than just a shop for medicines \u2013 it could save a trip to the GP Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tinnitus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tinnitus","content":"Tinnitus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tinnitus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tinnitus Real stories Tinnitus Clinical trials Tinnitus Tinnitus Causes Tinnitus Diagnosis Tinnitus Treatment Introduction  Tinnitus is the term for hearing sounds that come from inside your body, rather than from an outside source. It's often described as \"ringing in the ears\", although several sounds can be heard, including: buzzing humming grinding hissing whistling Some people may hear sounds similar to music or singing, and others hear noises that beat in time with their pulse (pulsatile tinnitus). You may also notice that your hearing is not as good as it used to be or you're more sensitive to everyday sounds (hyperacusis). Is it serious? Tinnitus is rarely a sign of a serious underlying condition. For some people it may come and go and only be a minor irritation. However, it can sometimes be continuous and have a significant impact on everyday life. Severe cases can be very distressing, affect concentration, and cause problems such as difficulty sleeping (insomnia) and depression. In many cases, tinnitus will get better gradually over time. But it's important to seek medical advice to see if an underlying cause can be found and treated, and to help you find ways to cope with the problem. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you continually or regularly hear sounds such as buzzing, ringing or humming in your ears. They can examine your ears to see if the problem might be caused by a condition they could easily treat, such as an ear infection or earwax build-up. They can also do some simple checks to see if you have any hearing loss. If necessary, your GP can refer you to a hospital specialist for further tests and treatment. Read more about diagnosing tinnitus. What causes tinnitus? Tinnitus can develop gradually over time or occur suddenly. It's not clear exactly why it happens, but it often occurs along with some degree of hearing loss. Tinnitus is often associated with: age-related hearing loss inner ear damage caused by repeated exposure to loud noises an earwax build-up a middle ear infection Ménière's disease \u2013 a condition that also causes hearing loss and vertigo (a spinning sensation) otosclerosis \u2013 an inherited condition where an abnormal bone growth in the middle ear causes hearing loss However, around one in every three people with tinnitus doesn't have any obvious problem with their ears or hearing. Read more about the causes of tinnitus. Who is affected? Most people have experienced short periods of tinnitus after being exposed to loud noises, such as after a music concert.  In the UK, more persistent tinnitus is estimated to affect around six million people (10% of the population) to some degree, with about 600,000 (1%) experiencing it to a severity that affects their quality of life. Tinnitus can affect people of all ages, including children, but is more common in people aged over 65. Treating tinnitus There's currently no single treatment for tinnitus that works for everyone. However, research to find an effective treatment is continuing. If an underlying cause of your tinnitus can be found, effectively treating it may help improve your tinnitus \u2013 for example, removing a build-up of earwax might help. If a specific cause can't be found, treatment will focus on helping you manage the condition on a daily basis. This may involve: sound therapy \u2013 listening to neutral sounds to distract you from the sound of tinnitus counselling \u2013 therapy that aims to educate you about tinnitus and help you learn to cope with it more effectively cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) \u2013 therapy that aims to help change the way you think about your tinnitus so it becomes less noticeable tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) \u2013 therapy that aims to help retrain the way your brain responds to tinnitus so you start to tune the sound out and become less aware of it You may also find self-help measures, such as relaxation techniques or sleep hygiene measures, helpful. Read more about how tinnitus is treated. Page last reviewed: 26\/06\/2015 Next review due: 26\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1449 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 305  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 283  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 174  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 562  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Tinnitus (BSL version) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An audiologist explains the possible causes and effects of tinnitus, plus how to deal with them. Ashleigh, who was diagnosed with tinnitus in 2005, describes how she copes with it. Media last reviewed: 19\/06\/2015 Next review due: 19\/06\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Hearing aids Hearing loss Hearing tests Hyperacusis Ménière's disease Protect your ears from loud music External links Action on Hearing Loss: tinnitus British Tinnitus Association Ménière's Society Hearing problems How to protect your hearing, with tips on spotting when you're going deaf, getting tested and hearing aids Find and choose services for tinnitus Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tiredness","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/tiredness-and-fatigue\/Pages\/tiredness-and-fatigue.aspx","content":"Tiredness and fatigue - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tiredness and fatigue Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Fatigue Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Why am I tired all the time? One in five of us feel unusually tired at any one time. Find out the common causes of fatigue. Why lack of sleep is bad for your health Sleep deprivation can raise your risk of diabetes, weight gain, depression and more. 10 medical reasons for feeling tired Many health conditions can cause fatigue, including restless legs, diabetes and food intolerance. Self-help tips to fight fatigue Many cases of unexplained tiredness are due to lifestyle factors. Use these self-help tips to restore your energy. Eight energy stealers Not sure what\u2019s causing your fatigue? Some surprising energy sappers may be to blame. Energy booster myths and facts Detox, superfoods and vitamin pills are touted as energisers, but there's no magic cure for tiredness. The energy diet Tips on what to eat (and drink) if you want to banish tiredness and feel full of energy. 10 tips to beat insomnia Following these simple lifestyle changes can greatly improve your quality of sleep. 5 ways to wipe out winter tiredness Feel sleepy when the days are shorter? You're not alone. Try these six ways to banish winter weariness. Getting started Find out how to tackle insomnia Get tiredness tips from the Royal College of Psychiatrists Healthy sleep tips for children Follow us on Twitter Join more than 160,000 who follow @NHSChoices for the latest and best health news and lifestyle advice Services near you Find addresses, phone numbers and websites for services near you Find and compare services Services Diabetes type I Diabetes type II GP Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Tools Could you be depressed? Take this short test to find out Are you at risk of diabetes? Take this short test to find out more Are you a healthy weight Check your weight and get tailored advice Get apps for sleep problems Find NHS-reviewed apps to help you deal with insomnia and other sleep problems Sleep problems in young children How to deal with sleep problems in young children, including frequent waking and nightmares Tiredness in pregnancy Find out about sleeplessness and feeling tired in pregnancy, and what you can do to help Why teenagers are always tired You might think teenagers sleep their lives away, but the opposite is true. Living with insomnia Find out what easy lifestyle changes you can make to improve your sleep NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Toe, broken","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/broken-toe","content":"Broken toe - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Broken toe  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Broken toe Introduction  A broken toe is a common injury, usually caused by dropping a heavy object on the foot or hitting the toe on something. It usually takes four to six weeks to heal, although severe injuries may take longer. A break or a crack in a bone is also known as a fracture. This advice is about the care of a toe following an injury. If you're not sure whether the toe is broken or just badly sprained, don't worry \u2013 in most cases, a painful and swollen toe caused by an injury should be cared for at home, regardless of whether or not it's broken. Learn more about sprains and strains. If you have a painful swollen toe but no injury, see your GP, especially if you have diabetes. How do I know if I\u2019ve broken my toe? A broken toe will be painful, swollen and red. There may be bruising of the skin around the area and sometimes a collection of blood beneath the toenail. You'll find it difficult to walk and wearing a shoe will be painful. If the break is severe, the toe may stick out at an angle. Most broken toes can be cared for at home and medical treatment may not be necessary. When to see your GP Check the toe every day and call your GP if: the pain gets worse or isn't relieved by ordinary painkillers \u2013 your GP may be able to prescribe a stronger painkiller the swelling or discolouration doesn\u2019t improve after a few days you have a wound near the injured toe, which will need cleansing to prevent infection When to go to hospital Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if: your toes are cold and numb or tingling (you may have damaged the nerves) the skin on your toe has turned blue or grey you've severely injured the toe \u2013 for example, if the toe is left bent at an angle or has an open wound Caring for your broken toe at home The following tips can be used to care for a broken toe at home. For little toes, put a piece of cotton wool or gauze between your injured toe and the one next to it and tape the two toes together with a plaster. The healthy toe will act as a splint. Using a shoe with a stiff sole or a surgical cast shoe will help your mobility. Keep your foot raised for as long as possible, for example by resting it on cushions. This will help reduce swelling and pain. Hold an ice pack (try frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel) to the toe for 15-20 minutes every one to two hours for the first couple of days. Do not apply ice directly to the skin. Rest the toe by not walking or standing for too long, and not putting weight on the toe. Avoid any activities that might have caused the fracture until your toe is fully healed. You can begin normal activity once the swelling has gone down and you're able to comfortably wear a protective shoe. Take over-the-counter painkillers such as ibuprofen to relieve the pain, but don't give aspirin to a child under 16 years of age. Wear sturdy shoes that don't squash or bend the toe. Severe toe fractures If the break is severe and bone has broken away at an angle, this will need to be moved back into place using a technique called reduction. An X-ray of the toe will be required first. You will be given an injection of local anaesthetic to numb the area and doctors can often realign the bone through the skin without making any cuts. If a break is particularly severe, surgery may be needed so special pins or screws can be fixed to the broken bone to keep it in place while it heals. A broken big toe may need to be supported in a cast. If a lot of blood is trapped underneath the toenail and it's very painful, it will need to be drained through a small hole made in your nail, or the nail will need to be removed. You may be given crutches so you can walk without putting weight on the toe. A broken toe bone that has pierced the skin and damaged the surrounding tissue may become infected, so the wound will need to be cleansed regularly. You may be prescribed antibiotics and a tetanus jab may be considered if your vaccinations aren't up to date. Page last reviewed: 16\/12\/2014 Next review due: 16\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1582 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 982  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 302  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 157  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links First aid Foot care and diabetes Sprains and strains External links Foot Health Facts: broken toes Foot care advice Ten top tips on how to take care of your feet, including advice on preventing and treating problems NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tongue pain or soreness","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tongue-pain","content":"Sore or painful tongue - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sore or painful tongue  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Sore tongue Introduction  A sore or painful tongue is usually caused by something obvious and visible, although there are a few less obvious causes you should be aware of that may need treating. If the pain is persistent and you haven't accidentally bitten or burnt your tongue, see your GP or dentist. There may be an underlying problem that needs treating, and your GP or dentist may be able to advise you about pain relief while you wait for it to get better. This page outlines the most likely causes of tongue pain, but you shouldn't use it to diagnose yourself with a condition \u2013 always leave that to a healthcare professional. Common causes Common causes of tongue pain are outlined below. Geographic tongue Also known as benign migratory glossitis or oral erythema migrans, geographic tongue is a common condition that causes irregular red patches surrounded by white lines to develop on the tongue, giving it a map-like appearance. In some people, the red patches may feel sore or sensitive to certain foods and drinks. You may notice that after a few days, weeks or months the position of these lines and patches change. They may disappear and re-appear later on a different part of the tongue. Some people find the condition improves over time, while for others it may be persistent. See your GP or dentist if you have persistent discoloured or painful patches on your tongue. It\u2019s not clear exactly what causes geographic tongue and there is no specific treatment for it, but you may be able to manage the pain by taking over-the-counter painkillers (speak to your pharmacist for advice) and avoiding anything that makes it worse, such as acidic, spicy or hot foods. Oral thrush Oral thrush is an infection in the mouth caused by a fungus, which can cause a coated or white tongue and areas of soreness. You are more likely to develop oral thrush if you: have recently taken antibiotics have poor oral hygiene wear dentures (false teeth), particularly if they don't fit properly have a weakened immune system have diabetes You should see your GP if you think you have oral thrush. If it is left untreated, the symptoms will persist and your mouth will continue to be uncomfortable. Oral thrush is treated with antifungal medicines taken for around a week. These usually come in the form of gels or liquid that you apply directly inside your mouth, although tablets or capsules are sometimes used. Aphthous mouth ulcers Aphthous mouth ulcers are painful sores that can occur anywhere within the mouth and are common on the underside of the tongue. Many mouth ulcers are caused by damage to the mouth, such as from accidentally biting your tongue or eating something hard and sharp. Ulcers that keep recurring have been linked to things such as stress, anxiety, hormone changes, certain foods and stopping smoking. Read more about the causes of mouth ulcers. Most mouth ulcers heal within a week or two and you may be able to manage the pain in the meantime by taking over-the-counter painkillers and avoiding anything that worsens it, such as spicy foods. See your GP or dentist if you have an ulcer that doesn\u2019t improve within a few weeks or if you develop ulcers regularly. Less common causes Less commonly, tongue pain may be caused by: a viral infection \u2013 such as an infection by viruses that cause hand, foot and mouth disease or cold sores vitamin deficiencies and anaemia \u2013 a sore tongue can sometimes be a symptom of iron deficiency anaemia and vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia median rhomboid glossitis \u2013 where a smooth, red, inflamed patch develops on the middle or back of the tongue, thought to result from a fungal infection glossodynia or \"burning mouth syndrome\" \u2013 a burning pain on the tip of the tongue that is often seen in people with depression glossopharyngeal neuralgia \u2013 repeated episodes of severe tongue pain believed to be caused by nerve irritation lichen planus \u2013 a long-term skin condition that causes an itchy rash and can also affect the mouth, causing a white lacy pattern and painful patches on the tongue Behçet's disease \u2013 a rare condition that causes inflammation of the blood vessels and can also lead to painful mouth ulcers  pemphigus vulgaris \u2013 a rare and serious condition that causes painful blisters to develop on the skin, as well as inside the mouth, nose, throat, anus and genitals medications \u2013 painful mouth ulcers can be a side effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and beta-blockers, and certain mouthwashes can cause tongue pain in some people Moeller's glossitis \u2013 a type of inflammation of the tongue cancer of the tongue \u2013 although this is rare Click on the above links for more information about these conditions and medications. Oral thrush can cause sore white plaques on the tongue  Page last reviewed: 13\/11\/2014 Next review due: 13\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 634 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 244  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 192  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coated or white tongue Iron deficiency anaemia Mouth ulcers Oral thrush Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia External links Behçet's Syndrome Society DermNet NZ: geographic tongue Mouth ulcers Mouth ulcers are painful round or oval sores that form in the mouth, most often on the inside of the cheeks or lips Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tongue, coated\/white","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/coated-tongue","content":"Coated or white tongue - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Coated or white tongue  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Coated or white tongue Introduction  A coated or white tongue occurs when the surface is colonised by bacteria or fungi, and dead cells become trapped between the small nodules on the tongue. A coated tongue isn't a disease and isn't usually a sign of anything serious. It's usually only temporary. You can try gently brushing it with a tongue scraper and drinking plenty of water to help it improve. However, sometimes a coated tongue can indicate an infection or more serious condition. You should see your GP for advice if: you're concerned about changes to the appearance of your tongue your tongue hurts (read about the causes of tongue pain) your coated tongue persists for longer than two weeks You can read on to learn more about the possible causes of a coated tongue, but don't use this to diagnose yourself with a condition \u2013 always leave that to your GP. Note that in a minority of people, a coated tongue may never return to its normal colour or texture, even after treatment.  Common causes of white plaques on the tongue Leukoplakia Leukoplakia is a common condition that results in a white patch in the mouth, which sometimes appears on the tongue. The patch is usually painless but cannot be removed by brushing or scraping. This white patch seems to be the result of too many cells being produced from the lining of the mouth and a protein called keratin being deposited. Leukoplakia can develop when the tongue has been irritated, and is linked with drinking too much alcohol and also with smoking. Although not usually dangerous, in a few cases leukoplakia turns cancerous, often many years or even decades after it first appears.  It's important that your mouth is regularly examined by a dentist or doctor to ensure any leukoplakia isn't increasing in size or changing, or that new areas of leukoplakia are not developing.  Read more information about leukoplakia. Your dentist or specialist will usually be able to tell the difference between a white tongue caused by leukoplakia and a coated tongue. Oral lichen planus Oral lichen planus (lichen planus of the mouth) is a long-term disorder of the immune system that causes white lacy streaks and white patches in the mouth, including on the tongue.  Mild cases do not usually cause any pain or discomfort, although it can cause burning sensations and discomfort in the mouth, painful red gums and sore patches in the lining of the mouth. The exact cause of oral lichen planus is unknown. It doesn't run in families and can't be passed on to other people.  Mild cases will not need any treatment. More severe cases can be managed with an antiseptic mouthwash plus steroid sprays or steroid tablets dissolved in water to make a mouth rinse. Read more information about lichen planus. Oral thrush Oral thrush is a yeast infection in the mouth caused by a fungus. It can cause a burning sensation on the tongue as well as sore white plaques that can be scraped off (although it may sometimes appear as a red patch). You are more likely to develop oral thrush if you: have diabetes are a certain age (oral thrush is more common in infants and elderly people) often take antibiotics have an iron deficiency or B-vitamin deficiency  have a weakened immune system wear dentures  You should see your GP if you think you have oral thrush. If it's left untreated, the symptoms will persist and your mouth will continue to be uncomfortable. Treatment is with antifungal medicines. Read more information about oral thrush. Syphilis Syphilis is a bacterial infection usually caught by having sex with someone who is infected. Syphilis can cause a small painless sore or ulcer on the tongue if caught from having oral sex. This appears from 10 days to three months after exposure to the infection. Treatment is with a single dose of penicillin. If left untreated, syphilis may lead to white plaques on the tongue called syphilitic leukoplakia. Read more information about syphilis. Oral thrush affecting the tongue  Dental health How to care for your teeth, including check-ups, brushing, braces and whitening Page last reviewed: 05\/11\/2014 Next review due: 05\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 454 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 199  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Tongue pain Oral thrush Leukoplakia External links British Dental Health Foundation: approved products Dental check-ups How often you need a dental check-up, and what to expect when you visit your dentist NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tongue-tie","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tongue-tie","content":"Tongue-tie - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tongue-tie  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview tongue-tie Clinical trials Tongue-tie Introduction  Tongue-tie (ankyloglossia) is a problem affecting some babies with a tight piece of skin between the underside of their tongue and the floor of their mouth (lingual frenulum). It can sometimes affect the baby's feeding, making it hard for them to attach properly to their mother's breast. If you're concerned about your baby's feeding and think they may have tongue-tie, speak to your infant feeding specialist, lactation consultant, health visitor, midwife or GP. The following information explains tongue-tie and the problems it can cause, and describes a quick and almost painless procedure to snip the skin, known as tongue-tie division, which should be considered if your baby is affected. What is tongue-tie? Tongue-tie is a birth defect that affects 4-11% of newborn babies. It's more common in boys than girls. Normally, the tongue is loosely attached to the base of the mouth with a piece of skin called the lingual frenulum. In babies with tongue-tie, this piece of skin is unusually short and tight, restricting the tongue's movement. This prevents the baby feeding properly and also causes problems for the mother. Breastfeeding problems To breastfeed successfully, the baby needs to latch on to both the breast tissue and nipple, and their tongue needs to cover the lower gum so the nipple is protected from damage. Babies with tongue-tie aren't able to open their mouths wide enough to latch on to their mother's breast properly. They tend to slide off the breast and chomp on the nipple with their gums. This is very painful and the mother's nipples can become sore, with ulcers and bleeding. Some babies feed poorly and get tired, but they soon become hungry and want to feed again. In most cases, these feeding difficulties mean the baby fails to gain much weight. How is tongue-tie treated? Treatment is not necessary if your baby has a piece of skin connecting the underside of their tongue to the floor of their mouth, but they can feed without any problems. If feeding is affected, the tongue-tie needs to be divided. Tongue-tie division Tongue-tie division involves cutting the short, tight piece of skin connecting the underside of the tongue to the floor of the mouth. It's a simple and almost painless procedure that usually resolves feeding problems straight away. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) supports the use of tongue-tie division, as it's safe and there is evidence it can improve breastfeeding. See the NICE guidelines on Division of tongue-tie for breastfeeding. The Association of Tongue-tie Practitioners website provides a list of NHS tongue-tie practitioners. How tongue-tie division is carried out In babies that are only a few months old, division of tongue-tie is usually performed without any anaesthetic (painkilling medication), or with a local anaesthetic that numbs the tongue. A general anaesthetic is usually needed for older babies with teeth, which means they'll be asleep during the procedure. The baby's head is held securely while sharp, sterile scissors are used to snip the tongue-tie. Some practitioners may use a laser instead of scissors. The procedure only takes a few seconds, and you can start feeding your baby immediately afterwards. Some babies sleep through it, while others cry for a few seconds. In small babies, being cuddled and fed is more important than painkillers. There should be little blood loss, though some bleeding is likely. A white patch may form under the tongue, which takes 24 to 48 hours to heal, but doesn't bother the baby. Tongue-tie in older children and adults Untreated tongue-tie may cause no problems as a child gets older, and any tightness may resolve naturally as the mouth develops with age. However, some cases can persist, and may cause problems such as speech difficulties and difficulty eating certain foods. Speak to your GP if you're concerned you or your child may be experiencing problems caused by tongue-tie. Tongue-tie division can be carried out in older children and adults, although this is usually done under general anaesthetic and may involve using stitches to close the resulting wound under the tongue. Page last reviewed: 20\/01\/2015 Next review due: 20\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 277 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 179  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breastfeeding challenges video Breastfeeding positioning and attachment Breastfeeding FAQs Pregnancy and baby guide External links Association of Tongue-Tie Practitioners (ATP): tongue-tie The Baby Friendly Initiative: tongue-tie National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): division of tongue-tie Southampton Children's Hospital: tongue-tie Help for sore or cracked nipples With the right help and support, sore or cracked nipples while breastfeeding can often be sorted out Breastfeeding: positioning and attachment Advice on how to get your breastfed baby attached properly, and tips on getting comfortable when you're breastfeeding NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tonsillitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tonsillitis","content":"Tonsillitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tonsillitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tonsillitis Real stories Tonsillitis Clinical trials Tonsillitis Tonsillitis Symptoms Tonsillitis Causes Tonsillitis Treatment Introduction  Tonsillitis is inflammation of the tonsils. It's usually caused by a viral infection or, less commonly, a bacterial infection. Tonsillitis is a common condition in children, teenagers and young adults. The symptoms of tonsillitis include: a sore throat and pain when swallowing earache high temperature (fever) over 38C (100.4F) coughing headache Symptoms usually pass within three to four days. When to see your GP Tonsillitis isn't usually a serious condition. You only need to see your GP if symptoms: last longer than four days and don't show any signs of improvement are severe \u2013 for example, if you're unable to eat or drink due to the pain, or you have difficulty breathing Your GP will examine your throat and ask you some questions about your symptoms. If necessary, a throat swab can be taken to confirm the diagnosis. The results usually take a few days to return. If your tonsillitis is caused by a bacterial infection, they may prescribe antibiotics. Typical signs of a bacterial infection include white pus-filled spots on the tonsils, no cough and swollen or tender lymph glands. If you develop severe tonsillitis as a teenager or adult, your GP may recommend a blood test for glandular fever. The tonsils The tonsils are two small glands that sit on either side of the throat. In young children, they help to fight germs and act as a barrier against infection. When the tonsils become infected, they isolate the infection and stop it spreading further into the body. As a child's immune system develops and gets stronger, the tonsils become less important and usually shrink. In most people, the body is able to fight infection without the tonsils. Removal of the tonsils is usually only recommended if they're causing problems, such as severe or repeated episodes of tonsillitis (see below). What causes tonsillitis? Most cases of tonsillitis are caused by a viral infection, such as the viruses that cause the common cold or flu virus (influenza). Some cases can also be caused by a bacterial infection, typically a strain of bacteria called group A streptococcus bacteria. These types of infections spread easily, so it's important to try to avoid passing the infection on to others by: staying away from public places, such as work, school or nursery, until your GP says it's safe to return (usually after the symptoms have passed) coughing and sneezing into a tissue and disposing of the tissue  washing hands before eating, after going to the toilet and, if possible, after coughing and sneezing Read more about the causes of tonsillitis. Treating tonsillitis There's no specific treatment for tonsillitis, but you may be able to reduce the symptoms by: taking paracetamol or ibuprofen to help relieve pain drinking plenty of fluids getting plenty of rest If test results show that your tonsillitis is caused by a bacterial infection, a short course of oral antibiotics may be prescribed. If oral antibiotics aren't effective at treating bacterial tonsillitis, intravenous antibiotics (given directly into a vein) may be needed in hospital. Chronic tonsillitis In most cases, tonsillitis gets better within a week. However, a small number of children and adults have tonsillitis for longer, or it keeps returning. This is known as chronic tonsillitis and surgical treatment may be needed. Surgery to remove the tonsils (a tonsillectomy) is usually only recommended if: you've had several severe episodes of tonsillitis over a long period of time repeated episodes are disrupting normal activities Read more about treating tonsillitis. Complications of tonsillitis Complications of tonsillitis are rare and usually only occur if it's caused by a bacterial infection. They're usually the result of the infection spreading to another part of the body. Possible complications of tonsillitis include: a middle ear infection (otitis media) \u2013 where fluid between the eardrum and inner ear becomes infected by bacteria quinsy (peritonsillar abscess) \u2013 an abscess (collection of pus) that develops between one of the tonsils and the wall of the throat obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) \u2013 where the walls of the throat relax during sleep, which causes breathing difficulties and poor sleep Other complications of tonsillitis are very rare and usually only occur if an underlying bacterial infection is left untreated. They include: scarlet fever \u2013 a condition that causes a distinctive pink-red skin rash rheumatic fever \u2013 this causes widespread inflammation throughout the body, leading to symptoms such as joint pain, rashes and jerky body movements glomerulonephritis \u2013 an infection (swelling) of the filters in the kidneys that can cause vomiting and a loss of appetite Page last reviewed: 29\/12\/2015 Next review due: 29\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1694 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 960  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 365  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 168  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Child health 6-15 Glandular fever Infectious illnesses Otitis media Quinsy Sore throat External links GOSH: what happens when your child\u2019s tonsils are removed Kidshealth: tonsillitis Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor Find and choose services for Tonsillitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tooth abscess","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Dental-abscess","content":"Dental abscess - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Dental abscess  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Dental-abscess Clinical trials Dental abscess   A dental abscess is a collection of pus that can form inside the teeth, in the gums, or in the bone that holds the teeth in place. It\u2019s caused by a bacterial infection. An abscess at the end of a tooth is called a periapical abscess. An abscess in the gum is called a periodontal abscess. Dental abscesses are often painful, but aren\u2019t always. In either case, they should be looked at by a dentist. It's important to get help as soon as possible, because abscesses don't go away on their own. They can sometimes spread to other parts of the body and make you ill. This page covers: Symptoms of a dental abscess What to do if you have a dental abscess Relieving your symptoms Treatments for a dental abscess What causes dental abscesses? Preventing dental abscesses Symptoms of a dental abscess Symptoms of an abscess in your tooth or gum may include: an intense, throbbing pain in the affected tooth or gum that may come on suddenly and gets gradually worse pain that spreads to your ear, jaw and neck on the same side as the affected tooth or gum pain that's worse when lying down, which may disturb your sleep redness and swelling in your face a tender, discoloured and\/or loose tooth shiny, red and swollen gums sensitivity to hot or cold food and drink bad breath and\/or an unpleasant taste in your mouth If the infection spreads, you may also develop a high temperature (fever) and feel generally unwell. In severe cases, you may find it hard to fully open your mouth and have difficulty swallowing or breathing. What to do if you have a dental abscess You should see a dentist as soon as possible if you think you have a dental abscess. Avoid visiting your GP, as there is little they can do to help. You can get help from: your registered dentist \u2013 if it's out of hours, they should have an answerphone message with details of how to access out-of-hours dental treatment NHS 111 \u2013 who can give you details of dental services in your area your local clinical commissioning group (CCG) \u2013 who can tell you the phone number of your local dental access helpline your local accident and emergency (A&E) department \u2013 if there are no other options or you're having difficulty breathing You may have to pay for emergency NHS dental treatment, depending on your circumstances. Read about NHS dental charges. Relieving your symptoms While you're waiting to see a dentist, painkillers can help control your pain. Ibuprofen is the preferred painkiller for dental abscesses, but if you're unable to take it for medical reasons, you can take paracetamol instead. Aspirin shouldn't be given to children under 16. If one painkiller doesn't relieve the pain, taking both paracetamol and ibuprofen at the doses shown in the medicine leaflet may help. This is safe for adults, but not for children under 16. It may also help to: avoid hot or cold food and drink if it makes the pain worse try eating cool, soft foods if possible, using the opposite side of your mouth use a soft toothbrush and temporarily avoid flossing around the affected tooth These measures can help relieve your symptoms temporarily, but you shouldn't use them to delay getting help from a dentist. Treatments for a dental abscess Dental abscesses are treated by removing the source of the infection and draining away the pus. Depending on the location of the abscess and how severe the infection is, possible treatments include: removing the affected tooth (extraction) \u2013 this may be necessary if root canal treatment isn't possible root canal treatment \u2013 a procedure to remove the abscess from the root of an affected tooth before filling and sealing it incision and drainage \u2013 where a small cut (incision) is made in the gum to drain the abscess (this is usually only a temporary solution and further treatment may be needed) Local anaesthetic will usually be used to numb your mouth for these procedures. More extensive operations may be carried out under general anaesthetic (where you're asleep). Antibiotics aren't routinely prescribed for dental abscesses, but may be used if the infection spreads or is particularly severe. What causes dental abscesses? Your mouth is full of bacteria, which form a sticky film on your teeth called plaque. If you don't keep your teeth clean, acids produced by the bacteria in plaque can damage your teeth and gums, leading to tooth decay or gum disease. The following can increase your chances of developing a dental abscess: poor oral hygiene \u2013 plaque can build-up on your teeth if you don't floss and brush your teeth regularly consuming lots of sugary or starchy food and drink \u2013 these can encourage the growth of bacteria in plaque and may lead to decay that can result in an abscess an injury or previous surgery to your teeth or gums \u2013 bacteria can get into any damaged parts of the teeth or gums having a weakened immune system \u2013 this includes people with certain underlying health conditions, such as diabetes, and those having treatment, including steroid medication or chemotherapy  Preventing dental abscesses You can reduce your risk of developing dental abscesses by keeping your teeth and gums as healthy as possible. To do this, you should: use floss or an interdental brush at least once a day to clean between your teeth and under the gum line brush your teeth with a fluoride toothpaste twice a day \u2013 spending at least two minutes each time avoid rinsing your mouth with water or mouthwash after brushing because this washes the protective toothpaste away \u2013 just spit out any excess toothpaste cut down on sugary and starchy food and drinks \u2013 particularly between meals or shortly before going to bed visit your dentist regularly \u2013 your dentist can suggest how often you should have a check-up, based on your oral health  Read more on how to keep your teeth clean and dental check-ups. Page last reviewed: 23\/03\/2016 Next review due: 23\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 474 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 244  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Find your nearest dentist Gum disease Root canal treatment Toothache Tooth decay External links British Dental Health Foundation: dental care Dental Complaints Service How to brush and floss Brushing twice a day with fluoride toothpaste will help keep your teeth and mouth healthy Finding an NHS dentist How to find an NHS dentist, including where to seek help if you have difficulties locating one in your local area Find a dentist near you Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tooth decay","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Dental-decay","content":"Tooth decay - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tooth decay  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Dental-decay Clinical trials Tooth decay   Tooth decay can occur when acid is produced from plaque, which builds up on your teeth. If plaque is allowed to build up, it can lead to further problems, such as dental caries (holes in the teeth), gum disease or dental abscesses, which are collections of pus at the end of the teeth or in the gums. This topic covers: Symptoms  Seeing a dentist  Treatment Cost of NHS treatment Prevention Protecting your child's teeth How plaque causes tooth decay Symptoms of tooth decay Tooth decay may not cause any pain. However, if you have dental caries you might have:  toothache \u2013 either continuous pain keeping you awake or occasional sharp pain without an obvious cause tooth sensitivity \u2013 you may feel tenderness or pain when eating or drinking something hot, cold or sweet grey, brown or black spots appearing on your teeth bad breath an unpleasant taste in your mouth Seeing a dentist Visit your dentist regularly, so early tooth decay can be treated as soon as possible and the prevention of decay can begin. Tooth decay is much easier and cheaper to treat in its early stages. Dentists can usually identify tooth decay and further problems with a simple examination or X-ray. Find your nearest dentist. It's also important to have regular dental check-ups. Adults should have a check-up at least once every two years and children under the age of 18 should have a check-up at least once a year. Read more on: how to find an NHS dentist what to expect when you visit your dentist getting over a fear of the dentist Treatments for tooth decay Treatment of tooth decay depends on how advanced it is. For early stage tooth decay \u2013 your dentist will talk to you about the amount of sugar in your diet and the times you eat. They may apply a fluoride gel, varnish or paste to the area. Fluoride helps to protect teeth by strengthening the enamel, making teeth more resistant to the acids from plaque that can cause tooth decay. Your dentist may discuss a filling or crown with you \u2013 this involves removing the dental decay, offering local anaesthetic to numb the tooth and filling the hole. Read about what NHS fillings and crowns are made of. If tooth decay has spread to the pulp (in the centre of the tooth, containing blood and nerves) \u2013 this may be removed in a process known as root canal treatment. If the tooth is so badly damaged that it can't be restored \u2013 it may need to be removed. Your dentist may be able to replace the tooth with a partial denture, bridge or implant. Cost of NHS treatment NHS charges are set by the government and are standard for all NHS patients. Charges are assessed each year and usually change every April. Some people don't have to pay for dental treatment, including children, pregnant women and new mothers. Financial help may also be available to those on a low income. Read more about: NHS dental charges Getting help with dental charges The cost of private dental treatment varies between practices, as there is no set charge. If you choose to see a private dentist, make sure to agree the cost before having treatment. Preventing tooth decay Although tooth decay is a common problem, it's often entirely preventable. The best way to avoid tooth decay is to keep your teeth and gums as healthy as possible. For example, you should: visit your dentist regularly \u2013 your dentist will decide how often they need to see you based on the condition of your mouth, teeth and gums cut down on sugary and starchy food and drinks, particularly between meals or within an hour of going to bed \u2013 some medications can also contain sugar, so it's best to look for sugar-free alternatives where possible look after your teeth and gums \u2013 brushing your teeth properly with a fluoride toothpaste twice a day, using floss and an interdental brush at least once a day avoid smoking or drinking alcohol excessively \u2013 tobacco can interfere with saliva production, which helps to keep your teeth clean, and alcohol can contribute to the erosion of tooth enamel see your dentist or GP if you have a persistently dry mouth \u2013 this may be caused by certain medicines, treatment or medical conditions Read: how to keep your teeth clean lifestyle tips for healthy teeth how does sugar in our diet affect our health? reading food labels  Protecting your child's teeth Establishing good eating habits by limiting sugary snacks and drinks can help your child avoid tooth decay. Regular visits to the dentist at an early age should also be encouraged. It's important to teach your child how to clean their teeth properly and regularly. Your dentist can show you how to do this. Younger children should use a children's toothpaste, but make sure to read the label about how to use it.  Children should still brush their teeth twice a day, especially before bedtime. Read more about: how to look after your baby's teeth how to look after your children's teeth tips on giving your child sweets, fizzy drinks and using bottles How plaque causes tooth decay Your mouth is full of bacteria that form a film over the teeth called dental plaque. When you consume food and drink high in carbohydrates \u2013 particularly sugary foods and drinks \u2013 the bacteria in plaque turn the carbohydrates into energy they need, producing acid at the same time. If the plaque is allowed to build up, the acid can begin to break down (dissolve) the surface of your tooth, causing holes known as cavities. Once cavities have formed in the enamel, the plaque and bacteria can reach the dentine (the softer, bone-like material underneath the enamel). As the dentine is softer than the enamel, the process of tooth decay speeds up. Without treatment, bacteria will enter the pulp (the soft centre of the tooth that contains nerves and blood vessels). At this stage, your nerves will be exposed to bacteria, usually making your tooth painful. The bacteria can cause a dental abscess in the pulp and the infection could spread into the bone, causing another type of abscess. Page last reviewed: 07\/04\/2016 Next review due: 07\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 326 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 145  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Toothache Gum disease Dental abscess Root canal treatment Find a dentist External links Oral Health Foundation Dental Complaints Service Dental check-ups How often you need a dental check-up, and what to expect when you visit your dentist How to brush and floss Brushing twice a day with fluoride toothpaste will help keep your teeth and mouth healthy Healthy life, healthy teeth Taking care of your general health, as well as your teeth, is the key to a healthy mouth Finding an NHS dentist How to find an NHS dentist, including where to seek help if you have difficulties locating one in your local area NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tooth, broken or knocked out","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/broken-tooth","content":"Broken or knocked-out tooth - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Broken or knocked-out tooth  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Broken tooth Introduction  Knocking out a tooth is a medical emergency. If an adult tooth is knocked out, try putting it back in place and go straight to a dentist. Don't try to re-insert a baby tooth \u2013 take your child to see a dentist immediately. If you can't put an adult tooth back into position, place it in milk and contact your usual dental practice. You may be able to see a dentist straight away or you may be directed to an urgent care dental service. If you don\u2019t have a regular dentist, contact NHS 111 for advice on where to get urgent care. If the tooth is just chipped, you should make an appointment to see a dentist to fill the tooth or smooth it down. This isn't an emergency and can wait until the dental surgery is open. Find your nearest dentist. A knocked-out tooth If you knock out a tooth, you should: find the tooth hold it by the crown (the white bit that sticks out of the gum) lick the tooth clean if it's dirty, or rinse it in water put it back into position (adult teeth only); never try to re-insert a baby tooth (see below) bite on a handkerchief to hold the tooth in place go to see a dentist as an emergency If you can't put the tooth back in position, put it in milk and see a dentist straight away. The sooner a knocked-out tooth is re-implanted, the more likely it is to embed itself back into the gum. If your child knocks out a baby tooth, you shouldn't try to re-implant it because you may damage the adult tooth growing underneath. Take your child to see a dentist immediately. At the dentist If you've put your tooth back in yourself, the dentist will check that it's in the correct position by having a look and taking an X-ray. They'll splint it to the teeth either side to hold it in position for two weeks. Splinting is a technique that temporarily attaches the tooth to keep it in place. If you've put your tooth in milk and gone straight to the dentist, the dentist will numb the affected area and reposition the tooth. They'll check that it\u2019s in the correct position by taking an X-ray before splinting it to the teeth either side for two weeks. A lost tooth If you can't find your tooth, the space can be filled with one of the following: denture \u2013 a removable false tooth that you have to take out to clean bridge \u2013 where a false tooth is glued to the teeth either side using a special cement  implant \u2013 where a titanium screw is placed in the jaw bone, and after a few months a mould is taken so that a false tooth can be made Some of the above treatments can be provided on the NHS. Read more about different types of dental treatments. A denture, bridge or implant will improve the appearance of your smile and restore your confidence. Not everyone needs to have missing teeth replaced \u2013 some people don't mind having a gap. Speak to your dentist about your options, to help you decide what you would like. A broken or chipped tooth If you have broken your tooth, try to find the fragment, store it in milk and see a dentist as soon as possible during working hours. The dentist may be able to glue the fragment back on to the tooth. Don't worry if you can\u2019t find the fragment, your dentist will be able to use a tooth-coloured filling material to build your tooth up. If part of a back tooth is broken, it may either need a filling or a crown (also known as a cap). If the tooth is badly broken and the nerves are exposed, it may be a little sensitive and may even need root canal treatment. This involves removing the nerve and placing a root filling. Protecting your teeth during sports If you play a sport, such as rugby or hockey, where there's a risk of being hit in the mouth, you may want to consider getting a mouthguard made by a dentist to protect your teeth. This involves taking a mould of your teeth, which will be used to make the mouthguard \u2013 this will fit well and protect your mouth. \"Boil and bite\" mouthguards, where the mouthguard is moulded using hot water, are also available, but they're not as good as one made by your dentist. This type of mouthguard is often uncomfortable to wear and doesn\u2019t provide the same level of protection as a custom-made mouthguard. The Dental Trauma UK website has more information about the management of dental trauma and mouthguards. Save a knocked out tooth Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation shows the basic steps you can take to save teeth injured or damaged as a result of trauma. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2016 Next review due: 26\/05\/2019 Page last reviewed: 11\/12\/2015 Next review due: 11\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 236 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Video: how to save a knocked out tooth Dental abscess Dental health Gum disease NHS dental services Teeth grinding Toothache External links British Dental Health Foundation: veneers Dental Trauma UK: knocked out a tooth? Tooth decay Tooth decay occurs when acids in your mouth dissolve the outer layers of your teeth. Read more about how it's treated and how you can prevent it Dental treatments Dental treatments explained, from fillings to implants, plus how much they cost Finding an NHS dentist How to find an NHS dentist, including where to seek help if you have difficulties locating one in your local area NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Toothache","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Toothache","content":"Toothache - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Toothache  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Toothache Clinical trials Toothache Introduction  Toothache refers to pain in and around the teeth and jaws that's usually caused by tooth decay. You may feel toothache in many ways. It can come and go or be constant. Eating or drinking can make the pain worse, particularly if the food or drink is hot or cold. The pain can also be mild or severe. It may feel \"sharp\" and start suddenly. It can be worse at night, particularly when you're lying down. A lost filling or broken tooth can sometimes start the pain. It can also sometimes be difficult to decide whether the pain is in your upper or lower teeth. When a lower molar tooth is affected, the pain can often feel like it's coming from the ear. Toothache in other upper teeth may feel like it's coming from the sinuses, the small, air-filled cavities behind your cheekbones and forehead. The area of your jaw close to the infected tooth may also be sore and tender to touch. It's also possible for periodontal disease to give rise to a \"dull\" pain. Periodontal disease is a bacterial infection that affects the soft and hard structures that support the teeth. When to see your dentist If you have toothache for more than one or two days, visit your dentist as soon as possible to have it treated. The longer you leave it, the worse it will get. If your toothache isn't treated, the pulp inside your tooth will eventually become infected. This can usually lead to a dental abscess, with severe and continuous throbbing pain. Painkillers, such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, may reduce the pain and discomfort while you're waiting for an appointment. Children under 16 years of age shouldn't be given aspirin. Find a dentist near you. What causes toothache? Toothache occurs when the innermost layer of the tooth (dental pulp) becomes inflamed. The pulp is made up of sensitive nerves and blood vessels. Dental pulp can become inflamed as a result of: tooth decay \u2013 this leads to holes (cavities) forming in the hard surface of the tooth a cracked tooth \u2013 the crack is often so small that it can't be seen with the naked eye loose or broken fillings receding gums \u2013 where the gums shrink (contract) to expose softer, more sensitive parts of the tooth root periapical abscess \u2013 a collection of pus at the end of the tooth caused by a bacterial infection There are a number of other conditions that can cause pain similar to toothache, even though the pulp isn't affected. These include: periodontal abscess \u2013 a collection of pus in the gums caused by a bacterial infection ulcers on your gums sore or swollen gums around a tooth that's breaking through \u2013 for example, when your wisdom teeth start to come through  sinusitis \u2013 which sometimes causes pain around the upper jaw an injury to the joint that attaches the jaw to the skull (temporomandibular joint) Babies can also experience discomfort when their teeth start to develop. This is known as teething. Treating toothache The type of treatment you have for toothache will depend on the cause of the pain, so your dentist will examine your mouth and may carry out an X-ray to try to identify the problem. If your toothache is caused by tooth decay, your dentist will remove the decayed area and replace it with a filling. If your toothache is caused by a loose or broken filling, the filling will be taken out, any decay will be removed, and a new filling put in place. If the pulp inside your tooth is infected, you may need root canal treatment. This procedure involves removing the infected pulp and then inserting a special type of filling to seal the tooth and prevent reinfection. Your tooth may need to be removed if the toothache can't be treated using these methods or the tooth is wedged between another tooth and your jaw (impacted). Preventing toothache The best way to avoid getting toothache and other dental problems is to keep your teeth and gums as healthy as possible. To do this, you should: limit your intake of sugary foods and drinks \u2013 you should have these as an occasional treat and only at mealtimes; read more about cutting down on sugar brush your teeth twice a day using a toothpaste that contains fluoride \u2013 gently brush your gums and tongue as well clean between your teeth using dental floss and, if necessary, use a mouthwash  don't smoke \u2013 it can make some dental problems worse Make sure you have regular dental check-ups, preferably with the same dentist.  The time between check-ups can vary, depending on how healthy your teeth and gums are and your risk of developing future problems. Your dentist will suggest when you should have your next check-up based on your overall oral health. Children should have a dental check-up every six months so tooth decay can be spotted and treated early. Read more about taking care of your teeth and keeping your teeth clean. Rate your dentist You can now comment on your NHS dentist and share your experiences with others \u2013 rate your dentist here. Page last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 714 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 201  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 265  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dental abscess Dental health Gum disease NHS dental services Tooth decay External links British Dental Health Foundation Dental Complaints Service General Dental Council Finding an NHS dentist How to find an NHS dentist, including where to seek help if you have difficulties locating one in your local area How to brush and floss Brushing twice a day with fluoride toothpaste will help keep your teeth and mouth healthy Children's teeth From brushing their first tooth to their first trip to the dentist, here's how to take care of your children's teeth NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Dental abscess","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Dental-abscess","content":"Dental abscess - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Dental abscess  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Dental-abscess Clinical trials Dental abscess   A dental abscess is a collection of pus that can form inside the teeth, in the gums, or in the bone that holds the teeth in place. It\u2019s caused by a bacterial infection. An abscess at the end of a tooth is called a periapical abscess. An abscess in the gum is called a periodontal abscess. Dental abscesses are often painful, but aren\u2019t always. In either case, they should be looked at by a dentist. It's important to get help as soon as possible, because abscesses don't go away on their own. They can sometimes spread to other parts of the body and make you ill. This page covers: Symptoms of a dental abscess What to do if you have a dental abscess Relieving your symptoms Treatments for a dental abscess What causes dental abscesses? Preventing dental abscesses Symptoms of a dental abscess Symptoms of an abscess in your tooth or gum may include: an intense, throbbing pain in the affected tooth or gum that may come on suddenly and gets gradually worse pain that spreads to your ear, jaw and neck on the same side as the affected tooth or gum pain that's worse when lying down, which may disturb your sleep redness and swelling in your face a tender, discoloured and\/or loose tooth shiny, red and swollen gums sensitivity to hot or cold food and drink bad breath and\/or an unpleasant taste in your mouth If the infection spreads, you may also develop a high temperature (fever) and feel generally unwell. In severe cases, you may find it hard to fully open your mouth and have difficulty swallowing or breathing. What to do if you have a dental abscess You should see a dentist as soon as possible if you think you have a dental abscess. Avoid visiting your GP, as there is little they can do to help. You can get help from: your registered dentist \u2013 if it's out of hours, they should have an answerphone message with details of how to access out-of-hours dental treatment NHS 111 \u2013 who can give you details of dental services in your area your local clinical commissioning group (CCG) \u2013 who can tell you the phone number of your local dental access helpline your local accident and emergency (A&E) department \u2013 if there are no other options or you're having difficulty breathing You may have to pay for emergency NHS dental treatment, depending on your circumstances. Read about NHS dental charges. Relieving your symptoms While you're waiting to see a dentist, painkillers can help control your pain. Ibuprofen is the preferred painkiller for dental abscesses, but if you're unable to take it for medical reasons, you can take paracetamol instead. Aspirin shouldn't be given to children under 16. If one painkiller doesn't relieve the pain, taking both paracetamol and ibuprofen at the doses shown in the medicine leaflet may help. This is safe for adults, but not for children under 16. It may also help to: avoid hot or cold food and drink if it makes the pain worse try eating cool, soft foods if possible, using the opposite side of your mouth use a soft toothbrush and temporarily avoid flossing around the affected tooth These measures can help relieve your symptoms temporarily, but you shouldn't use them to delay getting help from a dentist. Treatments for a dental abscess Dental abscesses are treated by removing the source of the infection and draining away the pus. Depending on the location of the abscess and how severe the infection is, possible treatments include: removing the affected tooth (extraction) \u2013 this may be necessary if root canal treatment isn't possible root canal treatment \u2013 a procedure to remove the abscess from the root of an affected tooth before filling and sealing it incision and drainage \u2013 where a small cut (incision) is made in the gum to drain the abscess (this is usually only a temporary solution and further treatment may be needed) Local anaesthetic will usually be used to numb your mouth for these procedures. More extensive operations may be carried out under general anaesthetic (where you're asleep). Antibiotics aren't routinely prescribed for dental abscesses, but may be used if the infection spreads or is particularly severe. What causes dental abscesses? Your mouth is full of bacteria, which form a sticky film on your teeth called plaque. If you don't keep your teeth clean, acids produced by the bacteria in plaque can damage your teeth and gums, leading to tooth decay or gum disease. The following can increase your chances of developing a dental abscess: poor oral hygiene \u2013 plaque can build-up on your teeth if you don't floss and brush your teeth regularly consuming lots of sugary or starchy food and drink \u2013 these can encourage the growth of bacteria in plaque and may lead to decay that can result in an abscess an injury or previous surgery to your teeth or gums \u2013 bacteria can get into any damaged parts of the teeth or gums having a weakened immune system \u2013 this includes people with certain underlying health conditions, such as diabetes, and those having treatment, including steroid medication or chemotherapy  Preventing dental abscesses You can reduce your risk of developing dental abscesses by keeping your teeth and gums as healthy as possible. To do this, you should: use floss or an interdental brush at least once a day to clean between your teeth and under the gum line brush your teeth with a fluoride toothpaste twice a day \u2013 spending at least two minutes each time avoid rinsing your mouth with water or mouthwash after brushing because this washes the protective toothpaste away \u2013 just spit out any excess toothpaste cut down on sugary and starchy food and drinks \u2013 particularly between meals or shortly before going to bed visit your dentist regularly \u2013 your dentist can suggest how often you should have a check-up, based on your oral health  Read more on how to keep your teeth clean and dental check-ups. Page last reviewed: 23\/03\/2016 Next review due: 23\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 474 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 244  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Find your nearest dentist Gum disease Root canal treatment Toothache Tooth decay External links British Dental Health Foundation: dental care Dental Complaints Service How to brush and floss Brushing twice a day with fluoride toothpaste will help keep your teeth and mouth healthy Finding an NHS dentist How to find an NHS dentist, including where to seek help if you have difficulties locating one in your local area Find a dentist near you Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Dental care for babies and children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/teething-and-tooth-care.aspx","content":"Baby teething symptoms - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Baby teething symptoms When it comes to teething, all babies are different. But your baby will probably get their first tooth some time during their first year. Keep reading to find out how to spot when your baby is teething and what order your baby's teeth are likely to appear in. When do babies start teething? Some babies are born with their first teeth. Others start teething before they are 4 months old, and some after 12 months. But most babies start teething at around 6 months.  Teething symptoms Baby teeth sometimes emerge with no pain or discomfort at all. At other times, you may notice that: your baby's gum is sore and red where the tooth is coming through one cheek is flushed your baby is dribbling more than usual they are gnawing and chewing on things a lot they are more fretful than usual  Read our tips on how to help your teething baby. Some people think that teething causes other symptoms, such as diarrhoea and fever, but there's no evidence to support this. You know your baby best. If they have any symptoms that are causing you concern, then seek medical advice. You can call NHS 111 or contact your GP. Read more about spotting the signs of serious illness. What order do baby teeth appear in? Here's a rough guide to how babies' teeth usually emerge: bottom incisors (bottom front teeth) \u2013 these are usually the first to come through, usually at around 5 to 7 months top incisors (top front teeth) \u2013 these tend to come through at about 6 to 8 months top lateral incisors (either side of the top front teeth) \u2013 these come through at around 9 to 11 months bottom lateral incisors (either side of the bottom front teeth) \u2013 these come through at around 10 to 12 months first molars (back teeth) \u2013 these come through at around 12 to 16 months canines (towards the back of the mouth) \u2013 these come through at around 16 to 20 months second molars \u2013 these come through at around 20 to 30 months Most children will have all of their milk teeth by the time they are two and a half years old.  Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Is my baby teething? Media last reviewed: 22\/01\/2015 Next review due: 22\/01\/2017 Page last reviewed: 10\/02\/2016 Next review due: 10\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 151 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Teething tips How to help your baby through teething, including advice on gels, teething rings, painkillers and avoiding teething rash NHS Choices links Can I give my child painkillers?   Fluoride When to start brushing your baby's teeth Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Dentists","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/NHSEngland\/AboutNHSservices\/dentists\/Pages\/overview.aspx","content":"Finding an NHS dentist - The NHS in England - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories You are here: The NHS in England NHS services explained NHS dental services NHS dental services explained Find a dentist dentists What\u2019s available on the NHS? dentists NHS dental charges dentists Visiting the dentist dentists Community dental services dentists Help with dental costs NHS dental services How to find an NHS dentist Everyone should be able to access good-quality NHS dental services. There is no need to register with a dentist in the same way as with a GP because you are not bound to a catchment area. Simply find a dental practice that's convenient for you, whether it's near your home or work, and phone them to see if any appointments are available. If you do not have a regular dental practice or are new to the area, you can search for a NHS dentist near you on this site. Be aware that not all dental practices will have the capacity to take on new NHS patients all the time and you may have to join a waiting list or contact multiple practices before you find a NHS dentist with capacity to accept new patients. You should also be aware that even if you filled in a registration form at your first visit to the practice, so that the dentist can add you to their patient database, that does not mean that you have guaranteed access to a new NHS dental appointment in the future. If the dentist\u2019s quota for NHS patients has been reached by the time you contact the practice you may not be offered an NHS appointment. In that case you can either choose to be seen privately, join a waiting list or look for a different dentist who is taking on new NHS patients. If after contacting several dental practices you still can\u2019t find a dentist accepting NHS patients, you should contact your local NHS England Area team, which should be able to tell you about available dentists in your area. NHS England commissions dental services in England and by doing so is required to meet the needs of their local population, for both urgent and routine dental care. If you feel dissatisfied with the way NHS England handled your concern, you have the right to complain. First, tell NHS England you are not happy with the service provided. Details of how to contact NHS England and what information to provide is given in the NHS complaints procedure. If you're still not satisfied with NHS England's response, you can take your complaint to the Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman.  Dental emergency and out-of-hours care If you require urgent treatment, please contact your usual dental practice as they may be able to see you or direct you to an urgent care dental service. If you do not have a regular dentist, contact NHS 111 for advice on where you can get urgent care. Emergency dental treatment will deal with the problem at hand and the fee for the treatment is currently £19.70. You may be advised to make another appointment for a separate course of non-urgent treatment. In this case, you will have to pay a second charge in the relevant treatment band. Share: Save: Print: Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Fear of the dentist Terrified of the dentist? Find out how to overcome your fear Useful links NHS Choices links Find a dentist NHS complaints procedure Dental health advice Common dental questions Dental abscess Dental care for babies and children Dentures (false teeth) Fluoride Gum disease Orthodontics Root canal treatment Toothache Tooth decay Wisdom tooth removal   External links General Dental Council NICE NHS England British Dental Health Foundation - dental helpline: 01788 539 780 Download NHS dental charges poster (PDF, 2Mb) NHS dental services leaflet (PDF, 2Mb) Comment on an NHS service Select a serviceSelect a service GP Hospital Dentist Pharmacists Opticians Walk-in Centre A&E Maternity Service Stop Smoking Services Care Providers & Care at Home Enter postcode, town or name Find Latest NHS services rated by patients The Smileworks Ltd Guilden Sutton Dental Practice Oak Vale Gardens WEST SPEKE HEALTH CENTRE Connaught Surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find a dentist","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/servicedirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearch.aspx","content":"Find services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Find services You can search all of our service directories from here. Try searching by service name, service type, condition or surgical procedure. Find services Find Location Locate me or browse the Services A-Z Need urgent care? Use our service finder to locate your nearest urgent care health services Open data for better services See the data used to monitor and shape services NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Help with dental costs","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/NHSEngland\/Healthcosts\/Pages\/Dentalcosts.aspx","content":"Help with dental charges - Health costs - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories You are here: The NHS in England About health costs Dental costs NHS in England - help with health costs Low income\/ Universal credit Healthcosts Dental costs Healthcosts Prescriptions Healthcosts Sight tests and optical vouchers Healthcosts Travel costs Healthcosts Wigs and fabric supports Healthcosts Dental costs Get help with dental costs Dental charges depend on the treatment you need to keep your mouth, teeth and gums healthy. You will only ever be asked to pay one charge for each complete course of treatment, even if you need to visit your dentist more than once to finish it. If you are referred to another dentist for another, separate course of treatment, you can expect a second charge. Some minor treatments are free.  NHS dental charges Band 1 course of treatment \u2013 £19.70 This covers examinations, diagnosis (including radiographs), advice on how to prevent future problems, scale and polish if clinically necessary, and preventative care (e.g. applications of fluoride varnish or fissure sealant). This band also covers emergency care in a primary care dental practice such as pain relief or a temporary filling. Band 2 course of treatment \u2013 £53.90 This covers everything listed in Band 1, plus any further treatment such as fillings, root canal work or if your dentist needs to take out one or more of your teeth. Band 3 course of treatment \u2013 £233.70 This covers everything listed in Bands 1 and 2, plus crowns, dentures, bridges and other laboratory work. Read the section Understanding NHS dental charges for more detailed information.   Who is entitled to free dental care? You do not have to pay for NHS dental treatment if, when the treatment starts, you are: aged under 18 under 19 and receiving full-time education pregnant or have had a baby in the previous 12 months staying in an NHS hospital and your treatment is carried out by the hospital dentist an NHS hospital dental service outpatient (however, you may have to pay for your dentures or bridges). You do not have to pay if, during the course of treatment, you or your partner, receive: Income Support Income-related Employment and Support Allowance Income-based Jobseeker\u2019s Allowance Pension Credit guarantee credit Universal Credit and meet the criteria or you are named on or entitled to a valid NHS tax credit exemption certificate \u2013 if you don't have a certificate, you can show your award notice; you qualify if you get Child Tax Credits, Working Tax Credits with a disability element (or both) and have income for tax credit purposes of £15,276 or less you are named on a valid HC2 certificate Find out more about the NHS Low Income Scheme (LIS).   Partial help If your name is on a valid HC3 certificate, you may not have to pay for all your treatment. Checks are made on free and reduced cost treatment claims. If you say you have the right to free treatment when you do not, you may incur a penalty charge.  Note You will not be exempt from paying because you receive: Incapacity Benefit, contribution-based Employment and Support Allowance, contribution-based Jobseeker\u2019s Allowance, Disability Living Allowance, Council Tax Benefit, Housing Benefit or Pension Credit savings credit, when paid on their own. Medical conditions do not exempt patients from payment for dental treatment. You will be asked to show your dentist written proof that you do not have to pay for all or part of your NHS treatment. You will also be asked to sign a form to confirm that you do not have to pay. I am on a low income, how can I get help with NHS charges? If you are on a low income you may be eligible to receive financial help through the NHS Low Income Scheme. To apply for an HC2 certificate, you should complete form HC1, which is available from Jobcentre Plus offices or most NHS hospitals. Your doctor, dentist or optician may be able to give you one, too. You can also get an HC1 form by calling 0845 610 1112. Whether you qualify for help is based on a comparison between your weekly income and assessed requirements at the time the claim is made. For more information about requirements visit NHS: help with health costs. You will qualify for a full-help HC2 certificate (which includes free NHS prescriptions) if your income is less than or equal to your requirements, or your income is greater than your requirements by no more than half the current English prescription charge. You will qualify for a limited-help HC3 certificate if your income is greater than your requirements by more than half the current English prescription charge. The HC3 certificate shows how much you have to pay towards your health costs. Certificates are usually valid for periods of between six months and five years, depending on your circumstances. Find out more about the NHS Low Income Scheme (LIS). Exemption for pregnant women Pregnant women and those who have had a baby in the last 12 months get free NHS dental treatment. You may have to show proof such as a maternity exemption certificate (MatEx), a maternity certificate (MATB1) or your baby's birth certificate. However, if you have given birth more than 12 months ago you will not be entitled to free NHS dental treatment. Please note that your MatEx alone only gives exemption from NHS prescriptions. How do I claim for help with NHS dental charges? Tell your dental practice you want NHS treatment when you make an appointment, and fill out the form you are given when you arrive. If you do not have to pay, put a cross in the appropriate box. If you have a valid HC2 certificate or tax credit exemption certificate, write in the certificate number. If you have a valid HC3 certificate, write in the certificate number and the maximum your certificate says you can pay. You will pay either what appears on the certificate or the actual charge, whichever is the least. You will be asked to show proof of your entitlement to help with dental costs. If you are not sure you are entitled to help, then you must pay. You can claim a refund, but make sure you keep all receipts. How can I claim a refund? Ask your dentist for the NHS receipt form FP64 or a receipt that shows the amount of the NHS charge and the date you paid. If you are claiming on the grounds of low income, complete form HC5 (D): Refund of NHS dental charges  (PDF, 60kb). It tells you where to send the completed form. If you want to claim a refund for another reason, for example, because you are pregnant, have had a baby in the previous 12 months, are aged under 18 or 18 and in full-time education, you will need to explain why you are claiming a refund. Enclose your receipt and make sure you include your full name and the address of your dentist, and write to: NHS Business Services Authority NHS Dental Services PO Box 3181 St Annes Road Eastbourne BN21 9PQ Note: refunds of charges for private dental treatment or sundry items such as toothbrushes cannot be made. Where a course of treatment is a mixture of NHS and private treatment a refund of the NHS charge only can be made. Important numbers Dental services helpline \u2013 0300 330 1348 NHS Low Income Scheme helpline \u2013 0300 330 1343 Prescription services helpline \u2013 0300 330 1349 Queries about medical exemption certificates \u2013 0300 330 1341 Queries about prescription prepayment certificates (PPCs) \u2013 0300 330 1341 Queries about tax credit certificates \u2013 0300 330 1347 Call 0300 123 0849 to order a paper copy of the HC12, HC5 and HC1 (SC) forms Call 0300 330 1343 for all other queries Share: Save: Print: Page last reviewed: 01\/04\/2016 Next review due: 01\/04\/2018 Paying NHS charges Read about rules on exemptions, claiming refunds, and what happens if you're caught claiming refunds dishonestly Your dentist visit Find out what to expect when visiting your dentist for a check-up, including what your dentist should and shouldn't do Download NHS dental charges poster (PDF, 2Mb) NHS dental services leaflet (PDF, 2Mb) HC11 Help with health costs (PDF, 453kb) HC12 charges and optical vouchers (PDF, 799kb) HC5 (D) claim dental charges (PDF, 231kb) HC5 (O) claim optical charges (PDF, 58kb) HC5 (T) claim travel charges (PDF, 53kb) HC5 (W) claim wigs and fabric supports (PDF, 49kb) HC1 (SC) for help with health costs if your are supported by a local authority for permanent residential care (PDF, 105kb) Useful links NHS Choices links Find dentists Comment on NHS services NHS services explained Choice in the NHS Medicines information Care finance and the law  External links NHS Business Service Authority HC11 in other languages NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Topical corticosteroids","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical)","content":"Topical corticosteroids - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Topical corticosteroids  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical) Clinical trials Topical corticosteroids Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical) Cautions Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical) How to use them Corticosteroid-preparations-(topical) Side effects Introduction  Topical corticosteroids, or topical steroids, are creams, gels or ointments containing corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are hormones that can reduce inflammation (redness and swelling), suppress the immune system and narrow the blood vessels in the skin. Their main purpose is to reduce skin inflammation and irritation. Conditions widely treated with topical corticosteroids include: eczema  seborrhoeic dermatitis \u2013 a condition that causes the skin to become flaky, leading to symptoms such as dandruff psoriasis  nappy rash lichen planus \u2013 a condition that causes an itchy, non-infectious rash discoid lupus erythematosus \u2013 a type of lupus that usually only affects the skin skin irritation caused by insect bites or stings Topical corticosteroids can't cure these conditions, but can help relieve the symptoms. See the separate topic on corticosteroids for information about oral (tablets and capsules), inhaled and injected corticosteroids. Types of topical corticosteroids Topical corticosteroids are available in different strengths, which are determined by the amount of corticosteroid they contain. They can be: mild \u2013 such as hydrocortisone moderate \u2013 such as clobetasone butyrate potent \u2013 such as betamethasone dipropionate very potent \u2013 such as clobetasol propionate Mild corticosteroids can often be bought over the counter from pharmacies, while stronger types are only available on prescription. You will usually be prescribed the lowest strength necessary to control your symptoms. Topical corticosteroids are also available in several different forms, including: solutions \u2013 water- or alcohol-based liquids that are non-greasy and easy to apply, but they can sometimes dry out the skin  lotions \u2013 similar to solutions but thicker; they are often recommended to treat larger areas of skin or hairy areas  creams \u2013 thicker than lotions and often recommended when the affected skin has become moist or is weeping ointments \u2013 liquids containing high levels of oil, which can make them greasy; they are usually recommended to treat skin that has become dry and scaly gels \u2013 more solidified, jelly-like substances, often used to treat areas of the body that are very hairy, such as the scalp mousses \u2013 foam-like substances that are also often used to treat the scalp Some topical corticosteroids are available combined with other substances, such as antibiotics or antifungals to treat infected areas of skin. Using topical corticosteroids Unless instructed otherwise by your doctor, follow the directions on the patient information leaflet that comes with your medication. This will give details of how much to apply and how often. Topical corticosteroids usually only need to be used once or twice a day for a few days or weeks at a time and should only be applied directly to the affected areas of skin. Occasionally, your doctor may suggest using a topical corticosteroid less frequently but over a longer period of time, to help prevent periods where your symptoms worsen. Read more about how to use topical corticosteroids. Safety and side effects If used as directed, topical corticosteroids are a very safe treatment. The most common side effect is a burning or stinging sensation when the medication is applied, but this usually improves as your skin gets used to the treatment. Serious side effects, such as thinning of the skin and changes in skin colour, usually only occur if too much potent or very potent topical corticosteroids are used for a long period. Topical corticosteroids are safe for most people to use, but there are some circumstances where they are not recommended. For example, very potent topical corticosteroids should be avoided if you are pregnant or breastfeeding and shouldn't be used to treat young children. Read more about things to consider before taking topical corticosteroids and the possible side effects of topical corticosteroids. Corticosteroids and anabolic steroids The steroids contained in topical corticosteroids shouldn't be confused with the type of steroids sometimes used (illegally) by bodybuilders and athletes. These are called anabolic steroids. Anabolic steroids contain a type of hormone that helps stimulate tissue growth, particularly muscle tissue. If used correctly, topical corticosteroids don't have any effect on muscle growth or development. Read more about anabolic steroid abuse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/12\/2014 Next review due: 15\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 218 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atopic eczema Corticosteroids Dandruff Psoriasis External links British Association of Dermatologists: topical corticosteroids National Eczema Society: topical corticosteroids NICE: eczema in children Yellow Card Scheme Atopic eczema Atopic eczema is a condition where the skin becomes itchy, red, dry and cracked. Find out about why it happens and how it's treated Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Torticollis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neck-pain","content":"Neck pain and stiff neck - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neck pain and stiff neck  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neck-pain Clinical trials Neck pain Introduction  Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. The pain and stiffness usually gets better after a few days or weeks, and is rarely a sign of a more serious problem. You can get a painful or stiff neck if you sleep in an awkward position, use a computer for a prolonged period of time, or strain a muscle because of bad posture. Anxiety and stress can also sometimes cause tension in your neck muscles, which can lead to pain in your neck. You can normally manage your symptoms at home by following the advice below. Managing neck pain at home For most of the types of neck pain described above, the advice is generally the same: carry on with your normal daily activities, keep active, and take painkillers to relieve the symptoms. You can also take these steps to manage your pain: take regular doses of paracetamol, ibuprofen, or a combination of the two, to control pain \u2013 ibuprofen gel can be rubbed on to your neck as an alternative to taking tablets (always follow the instructions that come with the medication) try holding a hot water bottle or heat pack to your neck \u2013 this can help reduce the pain and any muscle spasms, although some people find cold packs offer better relief sleep on a low, firm pillow at night \u2013 using too many pillows may force your neck to bend unnaturally check your posture \u2013 bad posture can aggravate the pain, and it may have caused it in the first place avoid wearing a neck collar \u2013 there is no evidence to suggest wearing a neck collar will help to heal your neck, and it's generally better to keep your neck mobile avoid driving if you find it difficult to turn your head \u2013 this may prevent you being able to view traffic if your neck is stiff or twisted, try some neck exercises \u2013 gently tense your neck muscles as you tilt your head up and down and from side to side, and as you carefully twist your neck from left to right; these exercises will help strengthen your neck muscles and improve your range of movement You can find more information about neck exercises on the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy website. When to see your GP See your GP if the pain or stiffness does not improve after a few days or weeks, if you cannot control the pain using ordinary painkillers, or if you are worried your neck pain could have a more serious cause. Your GP will examine your neck and ask some questions to help identify any underlying condition. They may also prescribe a stronger painkiller, such as codeine, to take with your usual over-the-counter painkillers. If you have had neck pain or stiffness for a month or more, your GP may be able to refer you to a physiotherapist. If your symptoms are particularly severe or do not improve, your GP may consider prescribing more powerful medication or referring you to a pain specialist for further treatment. Read more about living with pain for further information and advice about persistent pain. What causes neck pain and stiffness? A twisted or locked neck Some people suddenly wake up one morning to find their neck twisted to one side and stuck in that position. This is known as acute torticollis and is caused by injury to the neck muscles. The exact cause of acute torticollis is unknown, but it may be caused by bad posture, sleeping without adequate neck support, or carrying heavy unbalanced loads (for example, carrying a heavy bag with one arm). Acute torticollis can take up to a week to get better, but it usually only lasts 24 to 48 hours. Wear and tear in the neck Sometimes neck pain is caused by the \"wear and tear\" that occurs to the bones and joints in your neck. This is a type of arthritis called cervical spondylosis. Cervical spondylosis occurs naturally with age. It does not always cause symptoms, although in some people the bone changes can cause neck stiffness. Nearby nerves can also be squashed, resulting in pain that radiates from the arms, pins and needles, and numbness in the hands and legs. Most cases will improve with treatment in a few weeks. Whiplash Whiplash is a neck injury caused by a sudden movement of the head forwards, backwards or sideways. It often occurs after a sudden impact such as a road traffic accident. The vigorous movement of the head overstretches and damages the tendons and ligaments in the neck. As well as neck pain and stiffness, whiplash can cause tenderness in the neck muscles, reduced and painful neck movements, and headaches. Pinched nerve Neck pain caused by a squashed nerve is known as cervical radiculopathy. It's usually caused by one of the discs between the bones of the upper spine (vertebrae) splitting open and the gel inside bulging outwards on to a nearby nerve. The condition is more common in older people because your spinal discs start to lose their water content as you get older, making them less flexible and more likely to split. The pain can sometimes be controlled with painkillers and by following the advice below, although surgery may be recommended for some people. More serious causes Your neck pain may have a more serious cause if it's persistent and getting progressively worse, or you have additional symptoms, such as: a lack of co-ordination \u2013 you may find fiddly tasks increasingly difficult problems walking loss of bladder or bowel control a high temperature (fever) unexplained weight loss A serious cause is more likely if you have recently had a significant injury \u2013 for example, you were involved in a car accident or had a fall \u2013 or you have a history of cancer or conditions that weaken your immune system, such as HIV. See your GP if you are concerned. Preventing neck pain You may find the following advice helpful in preventing neck pain: make sure you have good posture when sitting and standing \u2013 read more about how to sit correctly, how to use a laptop safely, and common posture mistakes and fixes take regular breaks from your desk, driving or any activity where your neck is held in the same position for a long period of time if you often feel stressed, try relaxation techniques to help ease any tension in your neck avoid sleeping on your front, and make sure your head is in line with your body (not tilted to the side) if you sleep on your side only use enough pillows (usually only one) to keep your head level with your body   make sure your mattress is relatively firm \u2013 a soft mattress could mean your neck is bent while you sleep Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 10\/12\/2014 Next review due: 10\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2390 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1065  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 688  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 190  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 124  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 323  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Cervical spondylosis Living with pain NHS help for people with pain Shoulder pain Whiplash External links Action on Pain: chronic pain Arthritis Research UK: neck pain Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: neck pain Pain Concern How to sit correctly Prevent back pain and other related pains with these tips on setting up your work station correctly Ways to manage persistent pain If you're in pain, keeping active will help, as well as taking painkillers and doing physiotherapy Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC or transferrin) test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/TIBC-test","content":"Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) test  - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC or transferrin) test   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview TIBC test Introduction  A total iron-binding capacity (TIBC or transferrin) test is used to measure the amount of iron in the body. Transferrin is a glyco-protein that's found in blood plasma (the liquid part of blood). It's capable of binding iron and acts as a carrier for iron in the bloodstream. If you have an iron deficiency (a lack of iron in your blood), your iron level will be low but your TIBC will be high. If you have too much iron \u2013 for example, if you have a condition such as haemochromatosis, your iron level will be high but your TIBC will be low or normal. As transferrin is produced by the liver, your TIBC level will also be low if you have liver disease. Read more about the TIBC test at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 7 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Iron deficiency External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Total protein test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Total-protein-test","content":"Total protein test - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Total protein test  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Total protein test Introduction  A total protein test measures the amount of protein in your blood. The test can help diagnose a number of health conditions including: kidney disease liver disease malnutrition \u2013 where a person's diet doesn't contain enough nutrients to meet their body's needs If your total protein level is low, you may have a liver or kidney disorder, or a disorder where protein isn't digested or absorbed properly. A high total protein level could indicate dehydration or a certain type of cancer, such as multiple myeloma, that causes protein to accumulate abnormally. If the result of a total protein test is abnormal, further tests will be needed to identify which proteins are too high or too low. This will enable an accurate diagnosis to be made. Read more about the total protein test at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 25 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Chronic kidney disease External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tourette's syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tourette-syndrome","content":"Tourette's syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tourette's syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tourette-syndrome Real stories Tourette-syndrome Clinical trials Tourette-syndrome Community Tourette's syndrome Tourette-syndrome Symptoms Tourette-syndrome Causes Tourette-syndrome Diagnosis Tourette-syndrome Treatment Tourette-syndrome Associated problems Introduction  Tourette\u2019s syndrome is a neurological condition (affecting the brain and nervous system), characterised by a combination of involuntary noises and movements called tics. It usually starts during childhood and continues into adulthood. In many cases Tourette's syndrome runs in families and it's often associated with obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Tourette\u2019s syndrome is named after the French doctor, Georges Gilles de la Tourette, who first described the syndrome and its symptoms in the 19th century. Tics Tics can be: vocal (sounds) \u2013 such as grunting, coughing or shouting out words physical (movements) \u2013 such as jerking of the head or jumping up and down They can also be: simple \u2013 making a small movement or uttering a single sound complex \u2013 making a series of physical movements or speaking a long phrase Most people diagnosed with Tourette\u2019s syndrome have a combination of physical and vocal tics, which can be both simple and complex. The tics don't usually pose a serious threat to a person's overall health, although physical tics, such as jerking of the head, can often be painful. However, children and adults with Tourette\u2019s syndrome may experience associated problems, such as social isolation, embarrassment and low self-esteem. Read more about the signs and symptoms of Tourette\u2019s syndrome. What causes Tourette's syndrome? The cause of Tourette\u2019s syndrome is unknown. However, it's thought to be linked to problems with a part of the brain known as the basal ganglia, which helps regulate body movements. In people with Tourette\u2019s syndrome, the basal ganglia 'misfire', resulting in the characteristic tics. Read more about the causes of Tourette's syndrome. Treating Tourette\u2019s syndrome There's no cure for Tourette's syndrome, but treatment can help to control the symptoms. If your child is diagnosed with Tourette's syndrome, their treatment plan may involve a type of psychological therapy, known as behavioural therapy. Two types of behavioural therapy have been shown to reduce the impact and intensity of tics in some people. These are described below. Habit reversal therapy \u2013 involves monitoring the pattern and frequency of the tics and identifying any sensations that trigger them. The next stage is to find an alternative, less noticeable method of relieving the sensations that cause a tic (known as premonitory sensations). This is known as a competing response. Exposure with response prevention (ERP) \u2013 involves increasing exposure to the urge to tic to suppress the tic response for longer. This works on the theory that you get used to the feeling of needing to tic until the urge, and any related anxiety, weakens. When the tics are more frequent or severe, medication can help to improve them, such as alpha2-adrenergic agonists, muscle relaxants and dopamine antagonists. Surgery may be recommended in particularly severe cases that don't respond to treatment. However, surgery for Tourette's syndrome is rare. Read more about how Tourette\u2019s syndrome is treated. Associated conditions Children with Tourette\u2019s syndrome will usually also have one or more other developmental or behavioural conditions. The two most commonly reported conditions are: obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) \u2013 a condition characterised by unwanted persistent obsessive thoughts and useless compulsive behaviour, for example, a compulsion to keep washing your hands due to a fear of catching a serious illness attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) \u2013 a behavioural condition with symptoms such as a short attention span, being easily distracted, a tendency to be impulsive and not being able to sit still because you are constantly fidgeting (hyperactivity) Children with Tourette\u2019s syndrome may also have other behavioural problems, such as flying into a sudden rage, or behaving inappropriately or anti-socially with other children. In many cases, these associated conditions and behavioural problems can be more disruptive and troublesome than the tics of Tourette\u2019s syndrome, and are the main focus of treatment. Read more about the conditions associated with Tourette\u2019s syndrome. Outlook In around two-thirds of cases of Tourette's syndrome, symptoms improve significantly (usually around 10 years after they started). In many of these cases, medication or therapy will no longer be needed to control the person's tics. Some people's symptoms become less frequent and troublesome, or they disappear completely. In one third of people with Tourette\u2019s syndrome, the symptoms continue throughout their life. However, they usually become milder as the person gets older. This means the need for medication and therapy may pass over time. Who is affected by Tourette\u2019s syndrome? Tourette\u2019s syndrome is more common than most people realise. It affects around one in every 100 people. The symptoms of Tourette's syndrome usually begin at around seven years of age and become most pronounced at 10\u201311 years. For unknown reasons, boys are more likely to be affected by Tourette\u2019s syndrome than girls. Tourette's syndrome (TS) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A neurologist talks about Tourette's syndrome, which causes people to make a combination of involuntary movements and sounds. He offers advice on treatments and where to find support. Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Page last reviewed: 05\/01\/2015 Next review due: 05\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 253 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 136  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Coping with challenging behaviour Learning disabilities Obsessive compulsive disorder Tics External links NINDS: Tourette's syndrome facts Tourettes Action: about TS Tourettes Action: help and support Great Ormond Street Hospital: Tourette syndrome information pack Tics Tics are rapid, repetitive, involuntary muscle contractions. Motor tics are body movements and vocal tics are sounds Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Toxic shock syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Toxic-shock-syndrome","content":"Toxic shock syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Toxic shock syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Toxic-shock-syndrome Clinical trials Toxic shock syndrome Toxic-shock-syndrome Symptoms Toxic-shock-syndrome Causes Toxic-shock-syndrome Treatment Toxic-shock-syndrome Prevention Introduction  Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is a rare but life-threatening bacterial infection caused by Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes bacteria. These bacteria normally live harmlessly on the skin, nose or mouth but can invade the body's bloodstream and release poisonous toxins. The toxins also damage tissue, including skin and organs, and can disturb many vital organ functions. Read more about the symptoms of TSS. What to do TSS is a medical emergency and you should see your GP as soon as possible if you have any of the symptoms of TSS. If your GP suspects you have TSS, you'll be referred to hospital immediately and may be treated in an intensive care unit. The goal is to fight the infection with antibiotics and support any functions of the body that have been affected. Read more about the treatment of TSS. How is toxic shock syndrome diagnosed? There is no single test for toxic shock syndrome (TSS). The condition is diagnosed by looking for the typical symptoms and checking for evidence of organ failure. Organ function can be tested in a variety of ways, including blood and urine tests. A confident diagnosis of TSS can usually be made when: you have a temperature of 38.9C (102F) or above you have low blood pressure, fainting and dizziness you have a widespread, flat, red skin rash three or more of your organs have been affected by infection an infection caused by staphylococcus or streptococcus is apparent or likely If all of the above are present, it is likely that you have TSS. Who is at risk? Anyone can get TSS \u2013 men, women and children. For reasons that are still not understood, a significant proportion of cases occur in women who are on their period and using a tampon, particularly tampons that are designed to be 'super absorbent\u2019. TSS can also occur as a result of an infected boil, insect bite or wound, for example. Some cases are associated with skin damage from a burn or scald, which allows the bacteria to enter the body and release toxins. Find out more about the causes of TSS. The risk of TSS is greater in young people. It is thought that this is because many older people have developed immunity (resistance) to the toxins produced by the bacteria. Outlook TSS is a serious, life-threatening condition. If left untreated, the combination of shock and organ damage can result in death \u2013 especially if the infection was caused by streptococcus bacteria. If TSS is diagnosed and treated early with antibiotics, there is a good chance of recovery, and improvement is usually shown within 48 hours. However, TSS associated with streptococcus can be severe and rapidly progess to organ failure. The condition can also reoccur in those who recover. Staphylococcus aureus bacteria can cause TSS  Intensive care Find out about intensive care units (ICUs), specialist hospital wards for people who are seriously ill Page last reviewed: 03\/09\/2014 Next review due: 03\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 168 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Staphylococcal infections Streptococcal infections What if I forget to remove my tampon? Women's health 18-39 External links TSS Information Service Women\u2019s Health Information: TSS Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Toxocariasis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Toxocariasis","content":"Toxocariasis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Toxocariasis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Toxocariasis Clinical trials Toxocariasis Toxocariasis Prevention Introduction  Toxocariasis is a rare infection caused by roundworm parasites. It's spread from animals to humans through contact with infected faeces. Roundworm parasites are most commonly found in cats, dogs and foxes, and usually affect young children. This is because children are more likely to come into contact with contaminated soil when they play and put their hands in their mouths. However, cases have been reported in people of all ages. Signs and symptoms For most people, an infection with these roundworm larvae causes no symptoms and the parasites die within a few months. However, some people experience mild symptoms, such as: a cough a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above headaches stomach pain In rare cases, the roundworm larvae infect organs such as the liver, lungs, eyes or brain and cause severe symptoms, such as: fatigue loss of appetite or weight loss skin rashes wheezing or breathing difficulties seizures (fits) blurred or cloudy vision, usually only affecting one eye a very red and painful eye When to see your GP See your GP as soon as possible if you think you or your child have symptoms that may be caused by toxocariasis.  If one of your eyes is affected by toxocariasis, there's a risk of permanent vision loss. However, prompt treatment can reduce the chances of this happening. A blood test can usually detect toxocariasis, although you may need an eye examination to look for parasites if your eyes are affected. Why it happens The roundworm parasites responsible for toxocariasis (called Toxocara) live in the digestive system of dogs, cats and foxes. The worms produce eggs, which are released in the faeces of infected animals and contaminate soil. The eggs only become infectious after 10-21 days, so there's no immediate danger from fresh animal faeces. However, once the eggs are passed into sand or soil, they can survive for many months. Humans can become infected if contaminated soil gets into their mouth. Once the eggs are inside the human body, they move into the bowel before hatching and releasing larvae (the earliest stage of development). These larvae can travel to most parts of the body. However, as humans aren't the normal host for these larvae, they can't develop beyond this stage to produce eggs. This means that the infection can't spread between humans. Reducing your risk The best way to reduce the chances of developing toxocariasis is to practise good hygiene. For example, washing hands with soap and warm water after handling pets or coming into contact with sand or soil. If you have a pet cat or dog, they should be regularly de-wormed and their faeces should be disposed of immediately. Read more about preventing toxocariasis. How it's treated If you have no symptoms, or only mild symptoms, treatment isn't usually necessary. However, you'll need medication if you have a severe infection affecting your organs. A type of medication called an anthelmintic is used to kill the parasite larvae. Albendazole is most often used and mebendazole is an alternative. These medicines don't usually cause side effects, although some people may experience headaches or stomach pain. In addition to anthelmintics, steroid medications (corticosteroids) are often given to reduce any inflammation caused by a severe infection. If toxocariasis has affected the eye, steroid medication is used instead of anthelmintics. Surgery may also be needed \u2013 for example, if you develop retinal detachment. Most people make a full recovery and don't experience any long-term complications. However, there's a risk of permanent vision loss if one of the eyes is affected. Read more about treating toxocariasis. How common is toxocariasis? Toxocariasis is rare in the UK, although it's hard to determine exactly how many cases occur every year, as the condition is often misdiagnosed or undiagnosed. Many people are likely to have been exposed to the parasites without knowing it. In general, toxocariasis is more common in children and young adults. Page last reviewed: 10\/06\/2015 Next review due: 10\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 99 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Roundworm How to prevent germs from spreading Does your child have a serious illness? Learn the warning signs that your baby or toddler may be seriously ill Find and choose services for Toxocariasis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Toxoplasmosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Toxoplasmosis","content":"Toxoplasmosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Toxoplasmosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Toxoplasmosis Clinical trials Toxoplasmosis Toxoplasmosis Symptoms Toxoplasmosis Causes Toxoplasmosis Diagnosis Toxoplasmosis Treatment Toxoplasmosis Complications Toxoplasmosis Prevention Introduction  Toxoplasmosis is an infection caused by a parasite called Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii). The infection is common worldwide, including in the UK, but it's rarely reported because there are often no symptoms. Around 350 cases are reported in England and Wales each year, but it's thought the actual number of infections could be as high as 350,000. Estimates suggest up to a third of people in the UK will be infected by toxoplasmosis at some point in their life, but most people won't notice it. Is toxoplasmosis serious? Toxoplasmosis is usually nothing to worry about because the immune system is normally strong enough to fight the infection and stop it from causing serious illness. After getting the infection, most people are immune to it for the rest of their life. However, it can lead to serious problems in: women who become infected while they're pregnant \u2013toxoplasmosis could cause a miscarriage or stillbirth, or the infection could spread to the baby and cause serious complications (congenital toxoplasmosis) people with weak immune systems, such as those who've had an organ transplant, those with HIV, and those having chemotherapy \u2013 this could mean the infection is able to spread to the eyes, heart, lungs or brain Congenital toxoplasmosis is rare in the UK, with estimates suggesting only around 1 in every 10,000 to 30,000 babies are born with the condition. Read more about the symptoms of toxoplasmosis and complications of toxoplasmosis. How do you get toxoplasmosis? The parasite that causes toxoplasmosis is found in the poo (faeces) of infected cats and in infected meat. You can become infected if the parasites get into your mouth \u2013 for example, by: handling or eating raw, cured or undercooked infected meat \u2013 particularly lamb or pork eating food (such as unwashed fruit and vegetables) or drinking water contaminated with infected cat's poo accidentally getting contaminated soil or cat litter in your mouth Toxoplasmosis can't be passed from person to person, other than in rare cases, such as receiving an infected organ during an organ transplant, or if a newly infected mother passes the infection on to her unborn baby. Read more about the causes of toxoplasmosis. Testing for toxoplasmosis A blood test can be carried out to see if you have been infected with the T. gondii parasite. Testing may be carried out if there's a chance you have the infection and you have symptoms or you're at risk of serious problems. For example, it may be recommended if you're diagnosed with HIV. In the UK, testing for toxoplasmosis isn't routinely carried out during pregnancy. If you're concerned you might have been infected while you're pregnant, talk to your midwife, GP or obstetrician about the possibility of getting tested. Read more about how toxoplasmosis is diagnosed. Treating toxoplasmosis In otherwise healthy people, toxoplasmosis doesn't usually require treatment. Medication to treat the infection is usually only used to treat severe cases or prevent complications in people at risk, such as those with a weak immune system. Pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine or azithromycin alone are the main medications used. Pregnant women infected with toxoplasmosis for the first time may be given medication to reduce the risk of the unborn baby also becoming infected or damaged, although it's not clear exactly how effective this is. Read more about treating toxoplasmosis. Preventing toxoplasmosis There are a number of measures you can take to reduce your risk of developing toxoplasmosis, including: wearing gloves while gardening, particularly when handling soil washing your hands before handling food not eating raw or undercooked meat washing utensils and other kitchenware thoroughly after preparing raw meat washing fruit and vegetables thoroughly before eating them emptying cat litter trays every day avoiding direct contact with cat poo in cat litter or soil It's particularly important to take these precautions if you're pregnant or have a weakened immune system. Read more about preventing toxoplasmosis. Page last reviewed: 24\/06\/2015 Next review due: 24\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 123 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food safety Infections in pregnancy Why should pregnant women avoid sheep during the lambing season? External links Tommy's: infections and parasites Tommy's: toxoplasmosis and pregnancy Infections in pregnancy How to protect against infections that might affect your baby, such as CMV, toxoplasmosis and rubella How to prepare and cook food safely How to prepare and cook food correctly to reduce the risk of food poisoning, including E. coli Find and choose services for Toxoplasmosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tracheoesophageal fistula and oesophageal atresia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/oesophageal-atresia","content":"Oesphageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistula - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oesophageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistula  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview oesophageal-atresia Clinical trials Oesophageal atresia Introduction  Oesophageal atresia is a rare birth defect that affects a baby's oesophagus (the tube through which food passes from the mouth to the stomach). The upper part of the oesophagus doesn't connect with the lower oesophagus and stomach. It usually ends in a pouch, which means food cannot reach the stomach.  It often happens along with another birth defect called a tracheo-oesophageal fistula, which is a connection between the lower part of the oesophagus and the windpipe (trachea). This causes air to pass from the windpipe to the oesophagus and stomach, and stomach acid to pass into the lungs. These defects mean the baby won't be able to swallow safely, if at all. They could also develop life-threatening problems such as choking and pneumonia if not treated quickly, so surgery will usually be carried out within a few days of birth. Causes of oesophageal atresia Oesophageal atresia is thought to be caused by a problem with the development of the oesophagus while the baby is in the womb, although it's not clear exactly why this happens. The condition is more common in babies of mothers who had too much amniotic fluid in pregnancy (polyhydramnios). It's also more common in babies who have problems with the development of their kidneys, heart and spine. The risk of having another baby with oesophageal atresia is thought to be very small. Diagnosing oesophageal atresia Doctors may suspect your baby has oesophageal atresia before they're born if routine ultrasound scans show a lot of amniotic fluid in the womb, although this can have a number of causes. Tests to check for the condition will be carried out after your baby is born, if they seem to be having problems swallowing or breathing. A thin feeding tube may be passed down your baby's throat via their nose, to see if it reaches their stomach, and an X-ray may be carried out to check the oesophagus. Repairing the defects An operation to repair an oesophageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistula is usually done soon after birth. Your baby will be taken to the neonatal intensive care unit, where they're given a general anaesthetic. They will receive nutrition into a vein (intravenously) and a suction tube is used to remove fluid from the pouch in their oesophagus. The surgeon makes a cut on the right side of the chest, between the ribs, and closes off the abnormal connection (fistula) between the oesophagus and windpipe. The surgeon will then sew together the upper and lower parts of the oesophagus. If the gap in the oesophagus is large, your child may need to wait a few months for the operation, to allow their oesophagus to grow a bit more. In this case, they'll need to have a feeding tube temporarily placed into their stomach through their tummy. Occasionally, a procedure to lengthen the oesophagus before repairing it may be carried out. After surgery After surgery, your child will be kept in the intensive care unit and placed in an incubator. They may also need: antibiotics a machine to help them breathe (ventilator) a tube into their chest to drain fluids or air that might be trapped oxygen pain medication Your baby will be given nutrition intravenously at first, but you should be able to feed them after a few days using a feeding tube passed into their stomach through their nose. Going home You'll be able to take your baby home once they're taking food by mouth. This will usually take a week or two. You'll be advised about how to feed your child when they get home and as they get older. Breast or bottle feeding will usually be recommended for at least the first few months. It may then be possible to very gradually wean your child onto thicker foods. The hospital may be able to refer you to a dietitian for specific advice. Contact the hospital or your GP if your child is choking or coughing on their feeds, has any difficulty swallowing or is failing to gain weight. Risks of surgery With any surgery, there is a small risk of bleeding and infection. For this particular operation, the additional risks are: food or air leaking from the area being repaired narrowing of the repaired oesophagus re-opening of the fistula between the oesophagus and windpipe A further procedure or operation may need to be carried out to treat these problems if they develop. Outlook Most children who have had surgery to repair oesophageal atresia and\/or tracheo-oesophageal fistula will go on to have normal lives. However, there's a chance your child may experience some further problems, including: dysphagia (swallowing difficulties) gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) \u2013 where acid leaks out of the stomach and up into the oesophagus asthma-like symptoms \u2013 such as persistent coughing or wheezing recurrent chest infections tracheomalacia \u2013 where the repaired section of windpipe becomes floppy and makes breathing difficult Your child will be continuously monitored by specialists after their operation to pick up problems such as these and treat them early on. Some of these problems will improve as your child gets older. Information about your child If your child had oesophageal atresia as a baby, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists to better understand the condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/06\/2015 Next review due: 02\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 23 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Difficulty swallowing Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) External links Tracheo-Oesophageal Fistula Support (TOFS) Reflux in babies Babies often bring up milk during or shortly after feeding. This is known as \"posseting\", or \"reflux\" NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tracheostomy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tracheostomy","content":"Tracheostomy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tracheostomy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tracheostomy Clinical trials Tracheostomy Tracheostomy Why it's used Tracheostomy How it's performed Tracheostomy Living with Tracheostomy Complications Introduction  A tracheostomy is an opening created at the front of the neck so a tube can be inserted into the windpipe (trachea) to help you breathe. If necessary, the tube can be connected to an oxygen supply and a breathing machine called a ventilator. The tube can also be used to suction out any fluid that has built up in the throat and windpipe. Why they're used A tracheostomy may be created for a number of reasons, including: to deliver oxygen to the lungs when a person is unable to breathe normally after an injury or accident, or because their muscles are very weak to allow a person to breathe if their throat is blocked \u2013 this can be caused by a swelling, a tumour, or something stuck in their throat to reduce the risk of food or fluid going into your lungs (aspiration) if you find coughing difficult In many cases, a tracheostomy will be planned in advance and carried out in hospital, although sometimes it may need to be done in an emergency outside of hospital, such as at the scene of an accident. Read more about why tracheostomy procedures are carried out. How the procedure is carried out Planned tracheostomies are usually carried out under general anaesthetic. This means you will be asleep during the procedure and won't feel any pain. A doctor or surgeon will make a hole in your throat using a needle or scalpel before inserting a tube into the opening. If it's an emergency, the tracheostomy will be carried out as soon as possible using local anaesthetic if there is not enough time to use general anaesthetic. This means you will be awake during the procedure, but shouldn't feel severe pain. Afterwards, you'll need to stay in hospital for at least a few days or weeks. In some cases, it may be possible to remove the tube and close the opening before leaving hospital. However, the tube may need to stay in permanently if you have a long-term condition that affects your breathing. Read about how a tracheostomy is performed. Living with a tracheostomy It's possible to enjoy a good lifestyle with a permanent tracheostomy tube, but it can take some time to adapt. Most people will initially have difficulty with talking, eating, exercise, and keeping the tracheostomy tube clean and free of blockages. If you or your child needs a tracheostomy, a specially trained therapist can give you advice and answer any questions that you have. They will make sure you feel confident about looking after the tracheostomy before you leave hospital. Read more about living with a tracheostomy. Risks and complications A tracheostomy is generally a safe and effective procedure. However, as with all medical procedures, there is a small risk of complications, including bleeding, infection, and breathing difficulties. Read more about the possible complications of a tracheostomy. Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 81 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Intensive care Going into hospital Having an operation External links Great Ormond Street Hospital: living with a tracheostomy UK National Tracheostomy Safety Project NHS hospital services Find out how NHS hospitals operate, whether services are free and how to choose and a hospital that best suits your needs Questions about surgery It's important to know the details of any operation you're going to have. Find out what you should ask before having surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Traction","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Traction","content":"Traction - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Traction  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Traction Clinical trials Traction Introduction  Traction is the use of weights, ropes and pulleys to apply force to tissues surrounding a broken bone. It's sometimes used to keep a broken leg in the correct position during the early stages of healing, or to ease the pain of a fracture while a person is waiting for surgery. When traction is used There are several situations when traction may be used. For example, it may be used to: realign and fix bone fractures, such as a broken leg  help reduce pain before surgery  treat bone deformities caused by conditions such as scoliosis correct a muscle contracture (shortening of a muscle) Types of traction The two main types of traction are skin traction and skeletal traction. Skin traction Skin traction is usually carried out while a person is lying in a hospital bed. It uses equipment such as splints, bandages and adhesive tape that are attached to weights. A pulling force is applied through soft tissues, such as the skin, muscles and tendons. The affected area of the body is pulled in line using a pulley system attached to the bed. Skeletal traction Skeletal traction is used when a greater force needs to be applied. The force is applied directly to the skeleton, which means additional weight can be added without the risk of damaging the surrounding soft tissues. The skin can usually support up to 3.5kg (8lb), whereas the skeleton can support up to 12kg (25lb). During skeletal traction, pins, wires or screws are surgically inserted into the bone. This can be carried out using either a local anaesthetic or a general anaesthetic. After the pins, wires or screws have been inserted, weights are attached to them so that the affected body part can be pulled into the correct position. The length of time skeletal traction needs to be used for will depend on how badly injured the bones are. Does traction work? Traction is effective in providing temporary pain relief in the early stages of treatment after trauma. For long-term (chronic) conditions, there's little scientific evidence to support the use of traction. Skin or skeletal traction was often routinely applied to the limb of a fractured hip before surgery. However, recent research has shown this appears to have little or no benefit.  There's also little evidence to show traction is an effective method of treating spinal conditions such as: neck pain back pain sciatica (pain caused by irritation or compression of the sciatic nerve) Several studies have either produced inconclusive results or concluded that there are more effective methods of treating these conditions, such as exercise and physiotherapy. Although skin and skeletal traction may be used to treat certain types of fracture, traction isn't usually needed for minor fractures. Page last reviewed: 18\/11\/2014 Next review due: 18\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 26 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Broken leg Hip fracture External links NICE guidance: management of hip fracture in adults St John Ambulance: fractures Broken leg Advice about symptoms, first aid, rehabilitation and recovery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tens","content":"TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation)   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview tens Clinical trials TENS Introduction  Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is a method of pain relief involving the use of a mild electrical current. A TENS machine is a small, battery-operated device that has leads connected to sticky pads called electrodes. You attach the pads directly to your skin. When the machine is switched on, small electrical impulses are delivered to the affected area of your body, which you feel as a tingling sensation. The electrical impulses can reduce the pain signals going to the spinal cord and brain, which may help relieve pain and relax muscles. They may also stimulate the production of endorphins, which are the body's natural painkillers. What TENS is used for TENS may be able to help reduce pain and muscle spasms caused by a wide range of conditions including: arthritis period pain knee pain neck pain back pain sports injuries It's also sometimes used as a method of pain relief during labour. Does TENS work? There isn't enough good-quality scientific evidence to say for sure whether TENS is a reliable method of pain relief. More research is needed and clinical trials for TENS are ongoing. Healthcare professionals have reported that it seems to help some people, although how well it works depends on the individual and the condition being treated. TENS isn't a cure for pain and often only provides short-term relief while the TENS machine is being used. However, the treatment is generally very safe and you may feel it's worth trying instead of, or in addition to, the usual medical treatments. Trying TENS If you're thinking about trying TENS, it's a good idea to speak to your GP about a referral to a physiotherapist or pain clinic. A physiotherapist or pain specialist may be able to loan you a TENS machine for a short period if they think it could help. You can choose to buy your own TENS machine without getting medical advice, but it's generally better to have a proper assessment first, so you can find out whether a TENS machine is appropriate for you and be taught how to use it properly. To get the most benefit from TENS, it's important that the settings are adjusted correctly for you and your individual condition. If you find TENS effective, you can buy a TENS machine from a pharmacy. They range in price from about £10 to £200. More expensive machines aren't necessarily any better than lower-priced ones, so it's best to do some research before you buy. How to use TENS The information below is a general guide on how to use a TENS machine. You should always follow the manufacturer's specific instructions. TENS machines are small and lightweight, so you can use them while you're working or on the move. You can put it in your pocket, clip it to your belt or hold it in your hand. You can use TENS throughout the day for as long as you like, although it shouldn't be used while you're driving, operating machinery, or in the bath or shower.  Positioning the pads Make sure the machine is switched off before you attach the pads to your skin. Position the pads either side of the painful area, at least 2.5cm (1 inch) apart. Never place the pads over: the front or sides of your neck your temples your mouth or eyes your chest and upper back at the same time irritated, infected or broken skin varicose veins  numb areas Turning it on and adjusting the strength Turn on the TENS machine when the pads are attached in the correct places. You'll feel a slight tingling sensation pass through your skin. The machine has a dial that allows you to control the strength of the electrical impulses. Start on a low setting and gradually increase it until the sensation feels strong but comfortable. If the tingling sensation starts to feel painful or uncomfortable, reduce it slightly. Switch the TENS machine off after you've finished using it and remove the electrodes from your skin. Are there any risks of side effects? For most people, TENS is a safe treatment with no side effects. Some people may be allergic to the pads and their skin may become red and irritated, but special pads for people with allergies are available. TENS isn't safe for everyone to use. Don't use it without first seeking medical advice if: you have a pacemaker or another type of electrical or metal implant in your body you're pregnant, or there's a chance you might be pregnant \u2013 TENS may not be recommended early in pregnancy you have epilepsy or a heart problem Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 06\/10\/2015 Next review due: 06\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 345 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 157  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 117  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Back pain Neck pain Physiotherapy Sports injuries External links Action on Pain Pain Concern Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain Physiotherapy Find out how physiotherapy can help promote healing and wellbeing NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Transient ischaemic attack (TIA)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Transient-ischaemic-attack","content":"Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Transient ischaemic attack (TIA)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Transient-ischaemic-attack Clinical trials Transient ischaemic attack Transient-ischaemic-attack Symptoms Transient-ischaemic-attack Causes Transient-ischaemic-attack Diagnosis Transient-ischaemic-attack Treatment Transient-ischaemic-attack Prevention Introduction  A transient ischaemic attack (TIA) or \"mini stroke\" is caused by a temporary disruption in the blood supply to part of the brain. The disruption in blood supply results in a lack of oxygen to the brain. This can cause sudden symptoms similar to those of a stroke, such as speech and visual disturbance, and numbness or weakness in the face, arms and legs. However, a TIA does not last as long as a stroke. The effects often only last for a few minutes or hours and fully resolve within 24 hours. Signs and symptoms The main symptoms of a TIA can be remembered with the word FAST: Face-Arms-Speech-Time. Face \u2013 the face may have dropped on one side, the person may not be able to smile, or their mouth or eye may have dropped. Arms \u2013 the person with suspected stroke may not be able to lift both arms and keep them there because of arm weakness or numbness in one arm. Speech \u2013 their speech may be slurred or garbled, or the person may not be able to talk at all, despite appearing to be awake. Time \u2013 it is time to dial 999 immediately if you see any of these signs or symptoms. Read more about the symptoms of a TIA. Seeking medical advice In the early stages of a TIA, it's not possible to tell whether you are having a TIA or a full stroke, so it's important to phone 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance. Even if the symptoms disappear while you are waiting for the ambulance to arrive, an assessment in hospital should still be carried out. A TIA is a warning that you are at risk of having a full stroke in the near future, and an assessment can help doctors to determine the best way to reduce the chances of this happening. If you think you may have had a TIA previously, but the symptoms have since passed and you didn't seek medical advice at the time, you should make an urgent appointment with your GP so they can determine whether to refer you for a hospital assessment. Read more about diagnosing a TIA. What causes TIAs? During a TIA, one of the blood vessels that supply your brain with oxygen-rich blood becomes blocked. This blockage is usually caused by a blood clot that has formed elsewhere in your body and travelled to the blood vessels supplying the brain, although it can also be caused by pieces of fatty material or air bubbles. Certain things can increase your chances of having a TIA, including: smoking having high blood pressure (hypertension) being obese having high cholesterol levels regularly drinking an excessive amount of alcohol having atrial fibrillation (a type of irregular heartbeat) having diabetes People over 60 years of age, and people of Asian, African or Caribbean descent are also at a higher risk of having a TIA. Read more about the causes of TIA. How TIAs are treated Although the symptoms of a TIA resolve in a few minutes or hours, you will need treatment to help prevent another TIA or a full stroke happening in the future. Your treatment will depend on your individual circumstances, such as your age and medical history. You are likely to be given advice about lifestyle changes you can make to reduce your stroke risk (see below), in addition to being offered medication to treat the underlying cause of your TIA. In some cases, surgery may be needed to unblock the carotid arteries (the main blood vessels that supply the brain with blood). Read more about treating a TIA. Preventing TIAs A TIA is often a sign that another one may follow and you are at a high risk of having a full, life-threatening stroke in the near future. Regardless of whether or not you have had a TIA or stroke in the past, there are a number of ways you can lower your risk of having either in the future. These include: maintaining a healthy weight eating healthily taking regular exercise limiting your alcohol consumption not smoking Read more about how lifestyle factors can help to prevent a TIA. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/10\/2014 Next review due: 15\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1284 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 699  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 348  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 134  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, a consultant stroke physician explains what causes TIA and how to spot the symptoms. Also find out how Sally coped when she had multiple TIAs. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Stroke Atherosclerosis High blood pressure High cholesterol NHS Health Check External links Brain & Spine Foundation: TIA NICE: stroke and TIA Stroke: Act F.A.S.T. Stroke Association Stroke A stroke occurs when the blood supply to part of the brain is cut off. It's a serious condition that should be treated as a medical emergency Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find stroke support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=Stroke","content":"Find Stroke information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Stroke information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Transsexualism","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Gender-dysphoria","content":"Gender dysphoria - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Gender dysphoria  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Gender-dysphoria Real stories Gender dysphoria Gender-dysphoria Symptoms Gender-dysphoria Treatment Gender-dysphoria Guidelines   Gender dysphoria is a condition where a person experiences discomfort or distress because there's a mismatch between their biological sex and gender identity. It's sometimes known as gender identity disorder (GID), gender incongruence or transgenderism. Biological sex is assigned at birth, depending on the appearance of the genitals. Gender identity is the gender that a person \"identifies\" with or feels themselves to be. While biological sex and gender identity are the same for most people, this isn't the case for everyone. For example, some people may have the anatomy of a man, but identify themselves as a woman, while others may not feel they're definitively either male or female. This mismatch between sex and gender identity can lead to distressing and uncomfortable feelings that are called gender dysphoria. Gender dysphoria is a recognised medical condition, for which treatment is sometimes appropriate. It's not a mental illness. Some people with gender dysphoria have a strong and persistent desire to live according to their gender identity, rather than their biological sex. These people are sometimes called transsexual or trans people. Some trans people have treatment to make their physical appearance more consistent with their gender identity. Signs of gender dysphoria The first signs of gender dysphoria can appear at a very young age. For example, a child may refuse to wear typical boys' or girls' clothes, or dislike taking part in typical boys' or girls' games and activities. In most cases, this type of behaviour is just a normal part of growing up and will pass in time, but for those with gender dysphoria it continues through childhood and into adulthood. Adults with gender dysphoria can feel trapped inside a body that doesn't match their gender identity. They may feel so unhappy about conforming to societal expectations that they live according to their anatomical sex, rather than the gender they feel themselves to be. They may also have a strong desire to change or get rid of physical signs of their biological sex, such as facial hair or breasts. Read more about the symptoms of gender dysphoria. Getting help See your GP if you think you or your child may have gender dysphoria. If necessary, they can refer you to a specialist Gender Identity Clinic (GIC). Staff at these clinics can carry out a personalised assessment and provide any support you need. Assessment A diagnosis of gender dysphoria can usually be made after an in-depth assessment carried out by two or more specialists. This may require several sessions, carried out a few months apart, and may involve discussions with people you are close to, such as members of your family or your partner. The assessment will determine whether you have gender dysphoria and what your needs are, which could include: whether there's a clear mismatch between your biological sex and gender identity whether you have a strong desire to change your physical characteristics as a result of any mismatch how you're coping with any difficulties of a possible mismatch how your feelings and behaviours have developed over time what support you have, such as friends and family The assessment may also involve a more general assessment of your physical and psychological health. Treatment for gender dysphoria If the results of an assessment suggest that you or your child have gender dysphoria, staff at the GIC will work with you to come up with an individual treatment plan. This will include any psychological support you may need. Treatment for gender dysphoria aims to help reduce or remove the distressing feelings of a mismatch between biological sex and gender identity. This can mean different things for different people. For some people, it can mean dressing and living as their preferred gender. For others, it can mean taking hormones or also having surgery to change their physical appearance. Many trans people have treatment to change their body permanently, so they're more consistent with their gender identity, and the vast majority are satisfied with the eventual results. Read more about treating gender dysphoria. What causes gender dysphoria? Gender development is complex and there are many possible variations that cause a mismatch between a person\u2019s biological sex and their gender identity, making the exact cause of gender dysphoria unclear. Occasionally, the hormones that trigger the development of biological sex may not work properly on the brain, reproductive organs and genitals, causing differences between them. This may be caused by: additional hormones in the mother\u2019s system \u2013 possibly as a result of taking medication the foetus\u2019 insensitivity to the hormones, known as androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) \u2013 when this happens, gender dysphoria may be caused by hormones not working properly in the womb Gender dysphoria may also be the result of other rare conditions, such as: congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) \u2013 where a high level of male hormones are produced in a female foetus. This causes the genitals to become more male in appearance and, in some cases, the baby may be thought to be biologically male when she is born. intersex conditions \u2013 which cause babies to be born with the genitalia of both sexes (or ambiguous genitalia). Parents are recommended to wait until the child can choose their own gender identity before any surgery is carried out. Read more about disorders of sex development. How common is gender dysphoria? It's not known exactly how many people experience gender dysphoria, because many people with the condition never seek help. A survey of 10,000 people undertaken in 2012 by the Equality and Human Rights Commission found that 1% of the population surveyed was gender variant, to some extent. While gender dysphoria appears to be rare, the number of people being diagnosed with the condition is increasing, due to growing public awareness. However, many people with gender dysphoria still face prejudice and misunderstanding. Gender terminology Gender dysphoria is a complex condition that can be difficult to understand. Therefore, it helps to distinguish between the meanings of different gender-related terms: gender dysphoria \u2013 discomfort or distress caused by a mismatch between a person\u2019s gender identity and their biological sex assigned at birth transsexualism \u2013 the desire to live and be accepted as a member of the opposite sex, usually accompanied by the wish to have treatment to make their physical appearance more consistent with their gender identity transvestism \u2013 where a person occasionally wears clothes typically associated with the opposite gender (cross-dressing) for a variety of reasons genderqueer \u2013 an umbrella term used to describe gender identities other than man and woman \u2013 for example, those who are both man and woman, or neither man nor woman, or moving between genders Gender dysphoria isn't the same as transvestism or cross-dressing and isn't related to sexual orientation. People with the condition may identify as straight, gay, lesbian, bisexual or asexual, and this may change with treatment. Page last reviewed: 12\/04\/2016 Next review due: 12\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 390 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 217  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Transgender: Ruth's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Ruth was born in a male body but felt that she was female. She first sought advice from her GP when she was 17. Learn about her hormone treatment and surgery, and how she feels now. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Transgender health Androgen insensitivity syndrome Disorders of sex development External links The Beaumont Society Gender Recognition Act 2004 GOV.UK: discrimination Equality and Human Rights Commission Transgender health: Dawn's story Dawn mainly lives as a man but sometimes lives and dresses as a woman Transgender health Find out more about gender identity issues and read real stories about living as a trans person NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Transgender health","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Transhealth\/Pages\/Transhealthhome.aspx","content":"Transgender health - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Transgender health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Transgender health Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Kellie Maloney: 'My 60-year secret' Ex-boxing promoter Kellie Maloney talks about why it took 60 years to come out as transgender and her gender reassignment surgery. How to find an NHS gender identity clinic You and your GP may agree that you should see specialists at a gender identity clinic to consider your treatment options. Here's how to find one. 'My trans daughter' Sharon describes how her 15-year-old daughter Nicki was born in a male body but felt from a very young age that she should have been a girl. Dawn's transgender story Most of the time Dawn, 51, lives as a man using a male name. However, she considers herself to be transgender. 'My trans partner' Jules' partner, Dawn, lives as a man most of the time but has a strong feminine side. Here, Jules describes how she feels about telling people that Dawn is trans. What is gender dysphoria? Gender dysphoria is where a person experiences discomfort or distress because there is a mismatch between their biological sex and gender identity. Transgender: Ruth's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Ruth was born in a male body but felt that she was female. She first sought advice from her GP when she was 17. Learn about her hormone treatment and surgery, and how she feels now. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Getting started Mermaids GIRES: research on gender identity Living My Life: Information for trans people (PDF, 1.77Mb) Brook: advice for under-25s about gender Also on NHS Choices Gender dysphoria Depression Puberty Androgen insensitivity syndrome Turner syndrome Body dysmorphia Deep vein thrombosis Disorders of sex development What happens when you develop a mix or blend of male and female sexual characteristics Puberty Articles about puberty, including the stages of puberty in boys and girls, tips to help parents prepare their children and common Q&As Transgender: Jay's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Jay describes his transition from female to male. He talks about the expert help he received, his relationship with Lani and how he feels now. All NHS Choices videos Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Transurethral resection of the prostate","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Resectionoftheprostate","content":"Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Transurethral resection of the prostate resectionoftheprostate How it's performed resectionoftheprostate Recovery resectionoftheprostate Risks resectionoftheprostate Alternatives Introduction  A transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) is a surgical procedure that involves cutting away a section of the prostate. The prostate is a small gland in the pelvis only found in men. It's located between the penis and bladder, and surrounds the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the penis). If the prostate becomes enlarged, it can place pressure on the bladder and urethra. This can cause symptoms that affect urination. Why TURP is carried out TURP is often recommended when prostate enlargement (benign prostatic hyperplasia) causes troublesome symptoms and fails to respond to treatment with medication. Symptoms that may improve after TURP include: problems starting to urinate a weak urine flow or stopping and starting having to strain to pass urine a frequent need to urinate waking up frequently during the night to urinate (nocturia) a sudden urge to urinate being unable to empty your bladder fully How TURP is performed TURP is carried out using a device called a resectoscope, which is a thin metal tube containing a light, camera and loop of wire. This is passed along your urethra until it reaches your prostate, which means no cuts (incisions) need to be made in your skin. The loop of wire is then heated with an electric current and is used to cut away the section of your prostate that is causing your symptoms. A thin tube called a catheter is then inserted into your urethra to pump fluid into the bladder and flush away pieces of prostate that have been removed. General or spinal anaesthesia is used during the procedure so you don't feel any pain while it's carried out. Read more about how TURP is performed. Recovering from TURP You'll usually need to stay in hospital for one to three days after your operation. The catheter used during the operation will be left in place while you're in hospital because your urethra will be swollen and you may not be able to urinate normally at first. It's common to feel tired and under the weather for a week or two after going home. Most men are up and about after this time, but you'll need to take things easy for four to eight weeks. You'll usually be advised to stay off work and avoid lifting heavy objects, doing strenuous exercise, driving and having sex for at least a few weeks. It's normal to have some difficulties urinating and some blood in your urine for a few weeks. These problems should get better as you recover, but you should contact the hospital clinic or your GP if you're concerned. Read more about recovering from TURP. What are the risks? In most cases, TURP is a safe procedure and the risk of serious complications is very small. However, many men who have a TURP lose the ability to ejaculate semen during sex or masturbation, although they still have the physical pleasure associated with ejaculation (orgasm). This is known as retrograde ejaculation. Many men also temporarily lose the ability to control their bladder (urinary incontinence), although this usually passes in a few weeks. In rare cases, it may be persistent and need further treatment. There's also a small risk of problems such as erectile dysfunction, difficulties passing urine and urinary tract infections (UTIs). Read more detailed information about the risks of TURP. Alternatives to TURP There are a number of alternatives to TURP that can be just as effective with a lower risk of complications. They include: holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP) \u2013 a laser attached to a resectoscope is used to cut away excess prostate tissue  transurethral laser resection or vaporisation of the prostate \u2013 a thin tube called a cystoscope is inserted into the urethra and a laser attached to the cystoscope fires pulses of energy to burn away prostate tissue However, these procedures aren't suitable for all men with prostate enlargement and may not be widely available. They may be more suitable for men with very large prostates, older men who are not fit enough to have TURP, and those using blood-thinning medication such as warfarin. Read more about the alternatives to TURP. Page last reviewed: 08\/06\/2015 Next review due: 08\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 310 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Prostate enlargement animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Prostate enlargement or benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common condition in older men. This animation explains what the prostate gland is and how it functions. It also highlights the importance of seeing your GP to check for prostate cancer. Media last reviewed: 22\/01\/2016 Next review due: 22\/01\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Prostate health Prostate enlargement Urinary incontinence External links British Association of Urological Surgeons: prostate procedures NICE: TURis system Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Transverse myelitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neuromyelitis-optica\/pages\/symptoms.aspx","content":""},{"name":"Trauma and orthopaedics (orthopaedic surgery)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/orthopaedics","content":"Trauma and orthopaedics (orthopaedic surgery) Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trauma and orthopaedics (orthopaedic surgery)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trauma and orthopaedics (orthopaedic surgery) Introduction  Trauma and orthopaedics is an area of surgery concerned with injuries and conditions that affect the musculoskeletal system (the bones, joints, ligaments, tendons, muscles and nerves). You may be referred to a trauma and orthopaedic consultant for treatment of an injury such as a bone fracture, a deformity of the spine or limbs, or a long-term condition that's developed over many years, such as osteoarthritis. Orthopaedic specialists treat people of all ages, including: newborns and children with deformities \u2013 such as congenital dislocation of the hip, club foot and scoliosis young people who need joint preserving surgery \u2013 such as arthroscopic surgery or osteotomy (see below) older people with irreversible degenerative joint problems \u2013 who need their joints replacing Orthopaedic specialists Most consultants who work in trauma and orthopaedics provide emergency and non-emergency care for musculoskeletal injuries following an initial assessment in accident and emergency (A&E). They may: diagnose injuries or disorders using X-rays, blood tests or other tests treat injuries or conditions with medication or surgery recommend exercises or physiotherapy to restore movement, strength and functionality Most orthopaedic consultants also have a specialist interest. This may be a particular orthopaedic condition, a specific area of the body, or a field such as paediatrics or sport surgery. Orthopaedic operations Some of the most common operations orthopaedic surgeons carry out include: repairing fractured bones \u2013 for more information, you can read about: - broken arm or wrist - broken ankle - broken collarbone - broken hip - broken leg - broken ribs arthroscopy \u2013 a minimally invasive (keyhole) technique, where tools are inserted into a joint to diagnose and repair damaged joint tissue, such as cartilage damage repairing damaged muscles, torn tendons or torn ligaments  arthroplasty \u2013 surgery used to replace or resurface joints, usually because of arthritis; hip replacements and knee replacements are two widely used and highly effective operations surgery to correct bony deformity \u2013 procedures to correct deformities of the spine or limbs that either limit function or would cause long-term problems if left untreated. Examples are fusion surgery (where bones are welded together to heal into a single, solid bone) and osteotomy (correcting a bony malalignment to help prevent degeneration of an adjacent joint)  The above links will take you to more detailed information about these conditions and procedures. Page last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 46 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthroscopy Cartilage damage Healthy bones Hip replacement Knee replacement Osteoarthritis External links British Orthopaedic Association: patient information National Joint Registry: joint replacements Hip replacement A hip replacement is a common type of surgery where a damaged hip joint is replaced with an artificial one Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Travel health","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/TravelHealth\/Pages\/Travelhealthhome.aspx","content":"Travel health - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Travel health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Travel health Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Sunscreen and sun safety Advice for adults and children on sunscreen and sun safety in the UK and abroad. Family alerts travellers to deadly fake alcohol The family of a backpacker who died from methanol poisoning are warning travellers of the dangers of fake alcohol. 'Malaria nearly killed me' Mo mistakenly thought he was immune to malaria when he visited family in Sierra Leone. Before you travel Practical advice if you're travelling abroad, including vaccinations, DVT, travel insurance and sun safety. Travel health checklist Expert advice on what to pack to stay safe and healthy abroad, including first aid essentials. Travelling in pregnancy How to travel safely and comfortably, and when you might need a doctor's note. Safer sex on holiday Protect yourself from a sexually transmitted infection or unplanned pregnancy on holiday. Food and water abroad Find out how to protect yourself against illnesses from contaminated food and water. Prevent DVT when you travel Reduce your risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) during a long-haul flight. 'I got DVT from flying' Mark Pownall developed deep vein thrombosis (DVT) on a long-haul flight from New Orleans to London. Travelling with asthma Tips for travelling with asthma, including taking medication, vaccinations, air travel and insurance. Travelling with diabetes Travelling with diabetes, including diet, taking medicines, vaccines, insurance and air travel. Travelling with a heart condition Travelling with a heart condition, including vaccinations, travel insurance, air travel, pacemakers and ICDs. Apply for a free EHIC card If you're travelling to an EEA country, you need to tak a free EHIC card. Here's how to get one. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the mole information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/mole_a_visual_guide.html Ebola virus disease Ebola virus disease is a serious, usually fatal, disease for which there are no licensed vaccines or treatments Zika virus Zika virus disease is mainly spread by mosquitoes. For most people it is a very mild infection and isn't harmful. It may be more serious for pregnant women, as it's been linked to birth defects \u2013 specifically, abnormally small heads Travel health advice by country Travel in pregnancy How to travel safely and comfortably, and when you might need a doctor's note Video: European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) Get ready for your holiday and make sure you're covered for all eventualities. Is your EHIC still valid? Don\u2019t forget your passport You can renew your passport up to nine months before it expires \u2013 check now Healthy holidays How to keep your family healthy during the summer holidays. Includes beach safety, camping safety and free activities Travel health videos Watch our travel health videos and get ready for your next holiday, including tips on beach safety and how to apply sunscreen. Travel health Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A simple guide to health precautions when travelling abroad, including vaccinations, taking condoms and a first aid kit, and being careful about drinking water. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against Video: beach safety A holiday at the seaside is fun for the whole family. An RNLI lifeguard explains how to stay safe on the beach. Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer Treatment abroad Thinking of going abroad for dental or medical treatment? Find out about the risks and make an informed decision NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Dengue","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/dengue","content":"Dengue - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Dengue  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview dengue Real stories dengue Clinical trials Dengue   Dengue is a viral infection spread by mosquitoes. It's widespread in many parts of the world. In most people the infection is mild and passes in about a week without causing any lasting problems. But in rare cases it can be very serious and potentially life threatening. There's no specific treatment or widely available vaccine for dengue, so it's important to try to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes when visiting an area where the infection is found. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Treatment Where it's found How it's spread Prevention Severe dengue Symptoms of dengue Symptoms of dengue usually develop suddenly 4 to 10 days after becoming infected. Symptoms can include: a high temperature (fever), which can reach 40C (104F) or higher a severe headache pain behind the eyes muscle and joint pain feeling or being sick a widespread red rash loss of appetite The symptoms normally pass in about a week, although you may feel tired and slightly unwell for several weeks afterwards. In rare cases severe dengue can develop after the initial symptoms. When to get medical advice See your GP or call NHS 111 if you develop a fever or flu-like symptoms within two weeks of returning from an area where the dengue virus is found. Remember to tell them where you've been travelling. Go to a local doctor or hospital if you develop symptoms while travelling or living in an area where dengue is common.  There's little a doctor can do to help you recover, but it's important to get a proper diagnosis in case there's another cause of your symptoms. You may need a blood test to confirm that you have dengue. Treatment for dengue There's no cure or specific treatment for dengue. Treatment involves relieving your symptoms while the infection runs its course. You can usually look after yourself at home. The following can help: take paracetamol to relieve pain and fever \u2013 avoid aspirin or ibuprofen, as these can cause bleeding problems in people with dengue drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration \u2013 if you're currently abroad, only drink bottled water from properly sealed bottles get plenty of rest You should start to feel better in around a week, although it may be a few weeks before you feel your normal self again. Get medical advice if your symptoms don't improve. Where dengue is found Dengue isn't found in the UK. Cases in the UK only occur in people who've recently travelled to an area where the virus is common. Dengue is found in parts of: southeast Asia the Caribbean the Indian subcontinent South and Central America Africa the Pacific Islands Australia Use the NHS Fit for Travel destination guide to find out if dengue is a risk in a country you're planning to visit. How dengue is spread Dengue is spread by infected mosquitoes, usually the Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus varieties. These mosquitoes bite during the day, most often early in the morning or in the early evening before dusk. They're often found living around sources of stagnant water in built-up areas, such as wells, water storage tanks or old car tyres. Dengue isn't spread from person to person. You can get it again if you've had it before, as you'll only be immune to one particular variant of the virus. Preventing dengue There's currently no widely available vaccine for dengue. You can prevent it by avoiding being bitten by mosquitoes. The following can reduce your risk of being bitten: use insect repellent \u2013 products containing 50% DEET are most effective, but lower concentrations (15-30% DEET) should be used in children, and alternatives to DEET should be used in children younger than two months wear loose but protective clothing \u2013 mosquitoes can bite through tight-fitting clothes; trousers, long-sleeved shirts, and socks and shoes (not sandals) are ideal sleep under a mosquito net \u2013 ideally one that has been treated with insecticide be aware of your environment \u2013 mosquitoes that spread dengue breed in standing water in urban areas It's a good idea to speak to your GP, practice nurse or a travel clinic before travelling to get specific advice about what you can do to avoid dengue and other travel illnesses. Severe dengue In rare cases dengue can be very serious and potentially life threatening. This is known as severe dengue or dengue haemorrhagic fever. People who've had dengue before are thought to be most at risk of severe dengue if they become infected again. It's very rare for travellers to get it. Signs of severe dengue can include: severe tummy (abdominal) pain a swollen tummy persistent vomiting and vomiting blood bleeding gums or bleeding under the skin breathing difficulties or fast breathing cold, clammy skin a weak but fast pulse drowsiness or loss of consciousness If you have symptoms of severe dengue, call 999 (or the local emergency number if you're abroad) for an ambulance immediately. Page last reviewed: 05\/08\/2016 Next review due: 05\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 269 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 155  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Travel health Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A simple guide to health precautions when travelling abroad, including vaccinations, taking condoms and a first aid kit, and being careful about drinking water. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Insect bites and stings Malaria Travel health External links NHS Fit for Travel: dengue fever Travel Health Pro: dengue World Health Organization (WHO): dengue and severe dengue Healthcare abroad All you need to know about accessing healthcare abroad, whether you are on holiday, working abroad or you want to give birth outside the UK NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Healthcare abroad","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/nhsengland\/Healthcareabroad\/pages\/Healthcareabroad.aspx","content":"Cover your healthcare abroad - The NHS in England - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories You are here: The NHS in England Healthcare abroad Cover your healthcare abroad Whatever your reasons for going abroad, you may be entitled to medical care at reduced cost or sometimes free. Your entitlement will vary based on whether you're going to an European Economic Area country (EEA) or elsewhere in the world. Free EHIC If you're going abroad on holiday or a business trip, you should apply for a free European Health Insurance Card (EHIC), which may give you access to reduced-cost medical treatment.  About the EHIC Apply for an EHIC Treatment in Europe Find out what your funding options are if you wish to have treatment in Europe and how to apply for it. Getting started Funding options Giving birth Checklist Moving abroad Find out if you are still eligible for healthcare paid by the UK when you're going to live, work or study in another EEA country. Living abroad Studying abroad   Country guides Use the country-by-country guide and find out if you are entitled to healthcare paid by the UK. Different rules apply depending on the circumstances of your visit.  EEA countries Non-EEA countries Visiting England Find out how to access NHS services during your visit in England and check under what circumstances you are exempt from charges. EEA visitors Non-EEA visitors Visitors' FAQ  Moving to England Find out how to access NHS services if you are moving to England. Moving from the EEA Moving from outside the EEA Travel tips Get practical advice on sun safety, preventing malaria, travel insurance, DVT, jet lag and more. Before you travel Travel health check list Food and water abroad Travel FAQs Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against. Available jabs Travel jabs by destination Travel jabs on the NHS  Page last reviewed: 17\/08\/2015 Next review due: 17\/08\/2017 Apply for a free EHIC  The EHIC is entirely free of charge. However, other, unofficial, websites may charge you if you apply through them. Apply now for your free EHIC. For general queries about the EHIC, or if you're having difficulties with the online application form, updating your personal details, or replacing a lost or stolen card, call the automated EHIC application service on 0300 330 1350 (the line is manned from Monday to Friday 8am to 6pm and Saturday 9am to 3pm. A voice automated service is  available 24\/7). If you wish to claim a refund, call the Overseas Healthcare Team on 0191 218 1999. If calling from abroad ring +44 191 218 1999. EHIC on Facebook Follow EHIC on Facebook for the latest updates and answers to your questions European Health Insurance Card (EHIC): hot summer holidays Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Always expect the unexpected: a painful lesson the young man in this video had to learn. Find out why you should have a European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) when you go abroad. Media last reviewed: 17\/02\/2015 Next review due: 17\/02\/2017 Also on NHS Choices Altitude sickness Healthy holidays Insect bites Motion sickness Safe swimming: what's lurking in the water? Stings from marine creatures Sun screen and sun safety NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Japanese encephalitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/japanese-encephalitis","content":"Japanese encephalitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Japanese encephalitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Japanese-encephalitis Clinical trials Japanese encephalitis Japanese-encephalitis Causes Japanese-encephalitis Prevention Introduction  Japanese encephalitis is a type of viral brain infection that's spread through mosquito bites. It's most common in rural areas throughout South East Asia, the Pacific islands and the Far East, but is very rare in travellers. The virus is found in pigs and birds, and is passed to mosquitoes when they bite infected animals. It's more common in rural areas where there are pig farms and rice fields. It can't be spread from person to person. There's currently no cure for Japanese encephalitis. Treatment involves supporting the functions of the body as it tries to fight off the infection. This usually requires the person being admitted to hospital, so they can be given fluids, oxygen and medication to treat any symptoms. Symptoms Most people infected by the Japanese encephalitis virus have either no symptoms, or mild, short-lived symptoms, which are often mistaken for flu. However, around 1 in every 250 people who become infected with Japanese encephalitis develop more severe symptoms, as the infection spreads to the brain. This usually happens 5-15 days after infection and symptoms can include: high temperature (fever) seizures (fits) stiff neck confusion inability to speak uncontrollable shaking of body parts (tremor) muscle weakness or paralysis Up to one in every three people who develop these more serious symptoms will die as a result of the infection. In those who survive, these symptoms tend to slowly improve. However, it can take several months to make a full recovery and up to half of those who do survive are left with permanent brain damage. This can lead to long-term problems such as tremors and muscle twitches, personality changes, muscle weakness, learning difficulties and paralysis in one or more limbs. When to seek medical advice You should seek immediate medical advice if you have any of the symptoms of Japanese encephalitis and have recently visited, or are still in, an area where the infection is found. GOV.UK has information about who to contact when you need immediate medical help abroad. If you're already back in the UK, see your GP. Your GP or the healthcare professional treating you will ask about your symptoms, where you've been travelling, what you did on your trip and what vaccinations you've had. If necessary, they may carry out a blood test to see if you have an infection. How common is Japanese encephalitis? It's very rare for travellers visiting risk areas to be affected by Japanese encephalitis. It's estimated that less than one in a million travellers develop Japanese encephalitis in any given year. There hasn't been a reported case in a traveller returning to the UK for more than 10 years. The people most at risk are those who live and work in rural areas where the condition is widespread. Around 75% of cases involve children under the age of 15. Find out more about the causes of Japanese encephalitis and the countries and activities which have a higher risk of catching the disease. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates there are around 68,000 cases of Japanese encephalitis worldwide each year. Preventing Japanese encephalitis The best way to prevent Japanese encephalitis is to be vaccinated against the infection before you visit a part of the world where there's a risk of catching it. The risk is greater if you're planning to visit rural areas or go hiking or camping. The vaccine, which is usually only available privately, gives protection against Japanese encephalitis in more than 9 out of 10 people who receive it. Even if you've been vaccinated, you should still take precautions to reduce your risk of being bitten by an infected mosquito, such as: sleeping in rooms with close-fitting gauze over the windows and doors \u2013 if you're sleeping outside, use mosquito nets that have been impregnated with an insecticide covering up with long-sleeved tops, trousers and socks applying a good-quality insect repellent to exposed areas of skin Read more about preventing Japanese encephalitis. Accessing healthcare abroad It's a good idea to keep a list of important telephone numbers with you when travelling abroad. These should include numbers for: local emergency services a representative of the travel company you booked your visit with your travel insurer the British consulate or embassy in the area you are visiting \u2013 GOV.UK has a directory of British consulates and embassies Read more about accessing healthcare abroad. Page last reviewed: 25\/02\/2016 Next review due: 25\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 101 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Encephalitis Travel vaccinations Travel health advice Healthcare abroad External links GOV.UK: foreign travel advice Fit for Travel NaTHNaC NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Malaria","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Malaria","content":"Malaria - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Malaria  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Malaria Real stories Malaria Clinical trials Malaria Malaria Symptoms Malaria Causes Malaria Antimalarials Malaria Complications Malaria Prevention Introduction  Malaria is a serious tropical disease spread by mosquitoes. If it isn't diagnosed and treated promptly, it can be fatal. A single mosquito bite is all it takes for someone to become infected. Symptoms of malaria It's important to be aware of the symptoms of malaria if you're travelling to areas where there's a high risk of the disease. Symptoms include: a high temperature (fever) sweats and chills headaches vomiting muscle pains diarrhoea Symptoms usually appear between 7 and 18 days after becoming infected, but in some cases the symptoms may not appear for up to a year, or occasionally even longer. Read more about the symptoms of malaria. When to seek medical attention Seek medical help immediately if you develop symptoms of malaria during or after a visit to an area where the disease is found. You should still seek medical help even if it's several weeks, months or a year after you return from travelling. If there's a possibility you have malaria, a blood test will be carried out to confirm whether or not you're infected. You should receive the results of your blood test on the same day. If you have malaria, treatment will be started straight away. What causes malaria? Malaria is caused by a type of parasite known as Plasmodium. There are many different types of Plasmodia parasites, but only five cause malaria in humans. The Plasmodium parasite is mainly spread by female Anopheles mosquitoes, which mainly bite at dusk and at night. When an infected mosquito bites a human, it passes the parasites into the bloodstream. Malaria can also be spread through blood transfusions and the sharing of needles, but this is very rare. Read more about the causes of malaria and how it's spread. Malaria risk areas Malaria is found in more than 100 countries, mainly in tropical regions of the world, including: large areas of Africa and Asia Central and South America Haiti and the Dominican Republic parts of the Middle East some Pacific islands The 2014 World Malaria Report, published by the World Health Organization (WHO), estimates there were 198 million cases of malaria worldwide and 584,000 deaths in 2013. Malaria is not found in the UK, although about 1,586 travellers were diagnosed with the disease after returning to the UK in 2014, and three people died. The Fit for Travel website has more information about the risk of malaria in specific countries. Preventing malaria Many cases of malaria can be avoided. An easy way to remember is the ABCD approach to prevention: Awareness of risk \u2013 find out whether you're at risk of getting malaria before travelling Bite prevention \u2013 avoid mosquito bites by using insect repellent, covering your arms and legs, and using an insecticide-treated mosquito net Check whether you need to take malaria prevention tablets \u2013 if you do, make sure you take the right antimalarial tablets at the right dose, and finish the course Diagnosis \u2013 seek immediate medical advice if you develop malaria symptoms, as long as up to a year after you return from travelling Speak to your GP if you're planning to visit an area where there's a malaria risk. It may be recommended that you take antimalarial tablets to prevent infection. Read more about preventing malaria. Treating malaria If malaria is diagnosed and treated promptly, virtually everyone will make a full recovery. Treatment should be started as soon as the diagnosis has been confirmed. Antimalarial medication is used to both treat and prevent malaria. Which type of medication is used and the length of treatment will depend on: the type of malaria the severity of your symptoms where you caught malaria whether you took an antimalarial to prevent malaria  whether you're pregnant In some cases, you may be prescribed emergency standby treatment for malaria before you travel. This is usually if there's a risk of you becoming infected with malaria while travelling in a remote area with little or no access to medical care. Read more about treating malaria. Complications of malaria Malaria is a serious illness that can get worse very quickly. It can be fatal if not treated promptly. It can also cause serious complications, including: severe anaemia \u2013 where red blood cells are unable to carry enough oxygen around the body, leading to drowsiness and weakness cerebral malaria \u2013 in rare cases, the small blood vessels leading to the brain can become blocked, causing seizures, brain damage and coma The effects of malaria are usually more severe in pregnant women, babies, young children and the elderly. Pregnant women in particular are usually advised not to travel to malaria risk areas. Read more about the complications of malaria. Page last reviewed: 27\/11\/2015 Next review due: 27\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 565 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 340  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Malaria Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Malaria is a tropical disease. It is spread by mosquitoes infected with malaria parasites. In this video, an expert explains how malaria attacks different areas of the body, and what you can do to avoid getting infected. Media last reviewed: 27\/08\/2015 Next review due: 27\/08\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Healthcare abroad Insect bites Travel health Travel illnesses Travel vaccinations External links Fit for Travel National Travel Health Network and Centre Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Before you travel Advice for people travelling abroad, covering jet lag, vaccinations, DVT, travel insurance and sun safety 'Malaria nearly killed me' Mo mistakenly thought he was immune to malaria when he visited family in Sierra Leone Find and choose services for Malaria Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Meningitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Meningitis","content":"Meningitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Meningitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Meningitis Real stories Meningitis Clinical trials Meningitis Community Meningitis Meningitis Symptoms Meningitis Causes Meningitis Treatment Meningitis Complications Meningitis Vaccination   Meningitis is an infection of the protective membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord (meninges). It can affect anyone, but is most common in babies, young children, teenagers and young adults. Meningitis can be very serious if not treated quickly. It can cause life-threatening blood poisoning (septicaemia) and result in permanent damage to the brain or nerves. A number of vaccinations are available that offer some protection against meningitis. This page covers: Symptoms of meningitis When to get medical help How meningitis is spread Vaccinations against meningitis Treatments for meningitis Outlook for meningitis Symptoms of meningitis Symptoms of meningitis develop suddenly and can include: a high temperature (fever) over 37.5C (99.5F) being sick a headache a blotchy rash that doesn't fade when a glass is rolled over it (this won't always develop) a stiff neck a dislike of bright lights drowsiness or unresponsiveness seizures (fits)  These symptoms can appear in any order and some may not appear. Read more about the symptoms of meningitis. When to get medical help You should get medical advice as soon as possible if you're concerned that you or your child could have meningitis. Trust your instincts and don't wait until a rash develops. Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department immediately if you think you or your child might be seriously ill. Call NHS 111 or your GP surgery for advice if you're not sure if it's anything serious or you think you may have been exposed to someone with meningitis. How meningitis is spread Meningitis is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection. Bacterial meningitis is rarer but more serious than viral meningitis. Infections that cause meningitis can be spread through: sneezing coughing kissing sharing utensils, cutlery and toothbrushes Meningitis is usually caught from people who carry these viruses or bacteria in their nose or throat but aren't ill themselves. It can also be caught from someone with meningitis, but this is less common. Read more about the causes of meningitis. Vaccinations against meningitis Vaccinations offer some protection against certain causes of meningitis. These include the: meningitis B vaccine \u2013 offered to babies aged 8 weeks, followed by a second dose at 16 weeks, and a booster at 1 year 5-in-1 vaccine \u2013 offered to babies at 8, 12 and 16 weeks of age pneumococcal vaccine \u2013 offered to babies at 8 weeks, 16 weeks and 1 year old meningitis C vaccine \u2013 offered at 12 weeks of age, 1 year, and to teenagers and first-time university students MMR vaccine \u2013 offered to babies at 1 year and a second dose at 3 years and 4 months meningitis ACWY vaccine \u2013 offered to teenagers, sixth formers and \"fresher\" students going to university for the first time Read more about meningitis vaccinations. Treatments for meningitis People with suspected meningitis will usually have tests in hospital to confirm the diagnosis and check whether the condition is the result of a viral or bacterial infection. Bacterial meningitis usually needs to be treated in hospital for at least a week. Treatments include: antibiotics given directly into a vein fluids given directly into a vein oxygen through a face mask Viral meningitis tends to get better on its own within 7 to 10 days and can often be treated at home. Getting plenty of rest and taking painkillers and anti-sickness medication can help relieve the symptoms in the meantime. Read more about how meningitis is treated. Outlook for meningitis  Viral meningitis will usually get better on its own and rarely causes any long-term problems. Most people with bacterial meningitis who are treated quickly will also make a full recovery, although some are left with serious, long-term problems. These can include: hearing loss or vision loss, which may be partial or total problems with memory and concentration recurrent seizures (epilepsy) co-ordination, movement and balance problems loss of limbs \u2013 amputation of affected limbs is sometimes necessary Overall, it's estimated that up to 1 in every 10 cases of bacterial meningitis is fatal. Read more about the complications of meningitis. Page last reviewed: 12\/04\/2016 Next review due: 12\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 473 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 252  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Meningitis and septicaemia Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, Dr Radha presents the facts about meningitis and septicaemia, including a vaccination that offers protection for young people and teenagers from meningitis, septicaemia and meningococcal (groups A, C, W and Y). Media last reviewed: 03\/12\/2015 Next review due: 03\/12\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Blood poisoning Men B vaccine Men C vaccine Men ACWY vaccine External links Meningitis Now Meningitis Research Foundation National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): meningitis and septicaemia Brain and Spine Foundation: Meningitis Learn to recognise meningitis This symptom alert shows the signs and includes a printable checklist Vaccination calendar Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Rabies","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rabies","content":"Rabies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Rabies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rabies Clinical trials Rabies Rabies Symptoms Rabies Post-exposure treatment Rabies Vaccination Introduction  Rabies is a very serious viral infection that targets the brain and nervous system. You can catch rabies if you are bitten by an infected animal and haven't been vaccinated. It's almost always fatal once symptoms develop, but can be prevented if treatment is given promptly after exposure. In the UK, rabies is not found in the animal population (with the exception of bats) and infections are almost always picked up during travel abroad. When to seek medical help Seek immediate medical advice if you're worried that you or your child may have been bitten, scratched or licked by an animal while abroad, or if you're bitten or scratched by a bat in any country, including the UK. Although rabies is unlikely, you should also seek immediate medical help if you're bitten or scratched by a pet that has travelled abroad and has an uncertain vaccination history. If you've been bitten or scratched, you should: wash the wound thoroughly with soap and water under a running tap for 15 minutes apply antiseptic or alcohol to clean the wound leave the wound open go to the nearest hospital or medical centre and explain that you've been bitten If the incident happens abroad, you should seek local medical help and not wait until you have returned to the UK. How rabies spreads Rabies can be spread to humans from infected animals through a bite, scratch or lick to broken skin, the mouth or the eye. You may also be at risk if an animal spits in your face. In very rare cases, rabies can be spread during an organ transplant. Once it enters the body, the rabies virus multiplies before spreading into nerve endings. It then travels to the spinal cord and brain (the central nervous system). Once the virus is in the central nervous system, it multiplies rapidly and spreads to the salivary glands, lungs, kidneys and other organs. Animals that carry rabies All mammals, including monkeys, can carry the rabies virus, but the following species are more commonly infected: dogs bats raccoons foxes jackals cats mongooses What are the symptoms? It can take a while for symptoms to develop, but when they do the condition is almost always fatal. Symptoms in humans can include: a high temperature (fever) an irrational fear of water (hydrophobia) sensitivity to light (photophobia) fear of drafts of air (aerophobia) confusion or aggressive behaviour Read more about the symptoms of rabies. Treating rabies If you have been exposed (bitten, scratched or licked) by an animal that might have rabies, you'll need to seek medical advice to determine whether you need to have a course of treatment to prevent rabies. This is known as post-exposure treatment. It's important this is done before you develop symptoms. Once symptoms develop, the infection cannot be treated and it's almost always fatal. Post-exposure treatment (preventing rabies) Post-exposure treatment usually involves administering a course of the rabies vaccine, with or without rabies immunoglobulin, in an attempt to prevent the infection spreading to the brain and nervous system. If started promptly, post-exposure treatment is very effective. However, if rabies infection reaches a stage where it causes symptoms, it's almost always fatal. In these cases, treatment will usually focus on making you as comfortable as possible. Rabies can only be diagnosed once you have developed the disease and get symptoms. Various tests, including a skin biopsy, saliva tests or blood tests, can be used to make the diagnosis. Read more about treating rabies. Vaccination A number of vaccines can be used to prevent a rabies infection developing. Routine (pre-exposure) vaccination is usually only recommended if you regularly work with potentially infected animals or are travelling to a part of the world known to have high levels of rabies and limited medical care. A course of rabies vaccine can also prevent rabies from developing after a potential exposure, provided it is started promptly. Before you travel, you should seek advice about whether you need a rabies vaccination. For more information, visit the National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) website. Read more about the rabies vaccination. Avoiding rabies When travelling in countries that aren't rabies-free, avoid contact with animals and educate your children about the dangers of petting them. Examine your children regularly for cuts and scratches after contact with any animal and ask how they got them. Make sure they know that being bitten or licked by an animal may be dangerous and they need to tell you about it. It's rare for bat rabies viruses to infect other animals, and the risk of human infection is thought to be low. Nevertheless, if you find an injured bat or a bat that needs to be moved, don't touch it. Call the Bat Conservation Trust helpline on 0345 1300 228 for advice. Quarantine and the Pet Travel Scheme (PETS) To keep countries rabies-free, it's important there are strict public health measures to control stray animals such as foxes. The movement of potentially infected animals across borders into uninfected regions is controlled by strictly enforcing quarantine regulations. Animals that don't have a licence shouldn't be brought into the UK. The Pet Travel Scheme is a system that allows pet dogs, cats and ferrets from certain countries to enter the UK without going into quarantine as long as they have been vaccinated. It also means people in the UK can take their dogs, cats and ferrets to other European Union (EU) countries and return with them to the UK. More information can be found on the GOV.UK website. How common is human rabies? There are an estimated 60,000 deaths from human rabies each year worldwide. Most cases occur in the developing world, particularly in Africa and Asia. As a result of strict UK quarantine laws regarding transporting animals, as well as the introduction of the Pet Travel Scheme, the UK has been rabies-free since the beginning of the 20th century, with the exception of a rabies-like virus in a single species of bat. There have been no cases of human rabies acquired in the UK since 1902, apart from a case of rabies acquired in a bat-handler from an infected bat in 2002. The last recorded case of rabies in the UK was in 2012. The patient, who died, contracted the disease after being bitten by a dog in India. Page last reviewed: 17\/02\/2015 Next review due: 17\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 261 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Animal and human bites Healthcare abroad Travel health Travel vaccinations External links National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC): rabies World Health Organization (WHO): rabies NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Schistosomiasis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/schistosomiasis","content":"Schistosomiasis (bilharzia) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Schistosomiasis (bilharzia)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview schistosomiasis Clinical trials Schistosomiasis Introduction  Schistosomiasis, also known as bilharzia, is an infection caused by a parasitic worm that lives in fresh water in subtropical and tropical regions. The parasite is most commonly found throughout Africa, but also lives in parts of South America, the Caribbean, the Middle East and Asia. The Travel Health Pro website has a map of where schistosomiasis is found. You often don't have any symptoms when you first become infected with schistosomiasis, but the parasite can remain in the body for many years and cause damage to organs such as the bladder, kidneys and liver. The infection can be easily treated with a short course of medicine, so see your GP if you think you might have it. This page covers: How you get schistosomiasis Symptoms of schistosomiasis Long-term problems caused by schistosomiasis When to seek medical advice Treatments for schistosomiasis Preventing schistosomiasis How you get schistosomiasis The worms that cause schistosomiasis live in fresh water, such as: ponds lakes rivers reservoirs canals Showers that take unfiltered water directly from lakes or rivers may also spread the infection, but the worms aren't found in the sea, chlorinated swimming pools or properly treated water supplies. You can become infected if you come into contact with contaminated water \u2013 for example, when paddling, swimming or washing \u2013 and the tiny worms burrow into your skin. Once in your body, the worms move through your blood to areas such as the liver and bowel. After a few weeks, the worms start to lay eggs. Some eggs remain inside the body and are attacked by the immune system, while some are passed out in the person's urine or poo. Without treatment, the worms can keep laying eggs for several years. If the eggs pass out of the body into water, they release tiny larvae that need to grow inside freshwater snails for a few weeks before they're able to infect another person. This means it's not possible to catch the infection from someone else who has it. Symptoms of schistosomiasis Many people with schistosomiasis don't have any symptoms, or don't experience any for several months or even years. You probably won't notice that you've been infected, although occasionally people get small, itchy red bumps on their skin for a few days where the worms burrowed in. After a few weeks, some people develop: a high temperature (fever) above 38C (100.4F) an itchy, red, blotchy and raised rash a cough diarrhoea muscle and joint pain abdominal (tummy) pain a general sense of feeling unwell These symptoms, known as acute schistosomiasis, often get better by themselves within a few weeks. But it's still important to get treated because the parasite can remain in your body and lead to long-term problems (see below). Long-term problems caused by schistosomiasis Some people with schistosomiasis, regardless of whether they had any initial symptoms or not, eventually develop more serious problems in parts of the body the eggs have travelled to. This is known as chronic schistosomiasis. Chronic schistosomiasis can include a range of symptoms and problems, depending on the exact area that's infected. For example, an infection in the: digestive system can cause anaemia, abdominal pain and swelling, diarrhoea and blood in your poo urinary system can cause irritation of the bladder (cystitis), pain when peeing, a frequent need to pee, and blood in your urine heart and lungs can cause a persistent cough, wheezing, shortness of breath and coughing up blood nervous system or brain can cause seizures (fits), headaches, weakness and numbness in your legs, and dizziness Without treatment, affected organs can become permanently damaged. When to seek medical advice Visit your GP if you develop the symptoms above and you've travelled in parts of the world where schistosomiasis is found, or if you're concerned that you may have been exposed to the parasites while travelling. Tell your GP about your travel history and whether you think you may have been exposed to potentially contaminated water. If your GP suspects schistosomiasis, they may refer you to an expert in tropical diseases. The diagnosis is usually made by testing a sample of your blood. In some cases, eggs may be seen in a sample or your urine or poo. Treatments for schistosomiasis Schistosomiasis can usually be treated successfully with a short course of a medication called praziquantel, that kills the worms. Praziquantel is most effective once the worms have grown a bit, so treatment may be delayed until eight weeks after you were infected, or repeated again after this time. Steroid medication can also be used to help relieve the symptoms of acute schistosomiasis, or symptoms caused by damage to the brain or nervous system. Preventing schistosomiasis There's no vaccine for schistosomiasis, so it's important to be aware of the risks and take precautions to avoid exposure to contaminated water. You can check whether the area you're visiting is known to have a problem with schistosomiasis using Travel Health Pro's country information section. If you're visiting one of these areas: avoid paddling, swimming and washing in fresh water \u2013 only swim in the sea or chlorinated swimming pools take waterproof trousers and boots with you if there's a chance you'll need to cross a stream or river boil or filter water before drinking \u2013 as the parasites could burrow into your lips or mouth if you drink contaminated water avoid medicines sold locally that are advertised to treat or prevent schistosomiasis \u2013 these are often either fake, substandard, ineffective or not given at the correct dosage don't rely on assurances from hotels, tourist boards or similar that a particular stretch of water is safe \u2013 there have been reports of some organisations downplaying the risks Applying insect repellent to your skin or quickly drying yourself with a towel after getting out of the water aren't reliable ways of preventing infection, although it's a good idea to dry yourself as soon as possible if you're accidentally exposed to potentially contaminated water. There's some evidence that applying insect repellent containing 50% DEET to exposed areas each night after showering kills the parasite in the skin before it moves deeper into the body. Page last reviewed: 06\/01\/2016 Next review due: 06\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 141 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Healthcare abroad Travel health Travel vaccinations External links Fit for Travel: schistosomiasis GOV.UK: foreign travel advice Travel Health Pro: schistosomiasis WHO: schistosomiasis Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tick-borne encephalitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tick-borne-encephalitis","content":"Tick-borne encephalitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tick-borne encephalitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tick-borne-encephalitis Clinical trials Tick-borne-encephalitis Tick-borne encephalitis Tick-borne-encephalitis Symptoms Tick-borne-encephalitis Complications Tick-borne-encephalitis Prevention Introduction  Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is a viral infection spread to humans by the bite of a small spider-like parasite called a tick. It's a rare infection that's only acquired abroad in certain European and Asian countries (see 'Risk areas' below). Initial symptoms of TBE are similar to flu and can include: a high temperature (fever) a headache  tiredness  muscle pain These symptoms usually last for up to eight days, after which point most people make a full recovery. However, some people go on to develop more serious symptoms caused by the virus spreading to the protective layer of tissue that covers the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) or the brain itself (encephalitis). These 'second-stage' symptoms can include: changes in mental state, such as confusion, drowsiness or disorientation seizures (fits) sensitivity to bright light (photophobia) being unable to speak paralysis (inability to move certain body parts) If TBE reaches this stage, you'll usually need to be admitted to hospital. These symptoms tend to get slowly better over a few weeks, but it may take several months or years to make a full recovery and there's a risk you could experience long-term complications (see below). Around one in every 100 cases of TBE is fatal. Read more about the symptoms of tick-borne encephalitis. When to seek medical help Contact your GP if you've returned from an area of the world known to have cases of TBE (see below), and you start to experience flu-like symptoms. You should seek medical advice as soon as possible if you've been bitten by a tick while in a risk area and you haven't been vaccinated against TBE, or if you develop a rash or fever after being bitten. The advanced stages of TBE need emergency treatment in hospital. Call 999 (or the equivalent number where you're staying) immediately and ask for an ambulance if you have flu-like symptoms that are getting rapidly worse and affecting your mental state. Risk areas The TBE virus isn't present in the UK, so there's no risk of infection within the UK. However, cases of infection can occur among travellers returning from countries within Europe and Asia where TBE-infected ticks are found. Infected ticks are mainly found in rural areas of central, northern and eastern Europe. There are also two sub-types of TBE found in eastern Russia and in some countries in East Asia, particularly forested regions of China and Japan. Visit Travel Health Pro for a map showing the areas where infected ticks are found. How the infection is spread Ticks are found in forests, woods, grasslands, riverside meadows, marshes, brushwood and scrublands. They usually live in the undergrowth, where they can easily get onto people's clothes or skin. You can become infected with TBE if you're bitten by an infected tick. The virus is present in the tick\u2019s saliva, which also contains a natural anaesthetic so you may not notice you've been bitten. You can be bitten by an infected tick at any time of year, but tick activity is at its highest during the Spring and early Summer.  Drinking unpasteurised milk and eating unpasteurised dairy products from infected animals, particularly goats, can expose you to the TBE virus. However, this is rare. How common is tick-borne encephalitis? Very few cases of TBE have been reported in the UK, with just nine cases diagnosed in 2013\/14. However, TBE is fairly common in areas where infected ticks are found, so it's important to take steps to reduce your risk of infection (see below). The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that between 10,000 and 12,000 cases of TBE are reported worldwide each year. However, the actual number of cases is thought to be much higher than this because it's likely that many cases aren't reported. How tick-borne encephalitis is treated If a doctor thinks you may have TBE, they'll carry out a blood test or lumbar puncture (where a sample of spinal fluid is removed) to confirm whether you're infected. There's currently no cure for TBE, so treatment aims to help relieve symptoms until the infection passes. If you only experience the initial symptoms of TBE, no treatment is required other than taking painkillers, such as ibuprofen or paracetamol, to help relieve your symptoms. You'll usually be admitted to hospital if you develop second-stage symptoms. In hospital you'll receive fluids into a vein (intravenous fluids), help with breathing and nursing care.  Read more about treating viral meningitis and treating encephalitis. Possible complications If you develop second-stage symptoms of TBE caused by the infection spreading to the brain, there's a risk you could experience long-term (and possibly permanent) complications, such as: memory problems problems concentrating and a short attention span behavioural changes, such as becoming more impulsive and having poor judgement These types of long-term effects occur in more than one in 10 people who develop symptoms of TBE. Read more about the complications of tick-borne encephalitis. Preventing tick-borne encephalitis The best way to prevent TBE is to be vaccinated against the infection before you travel if you're going to be working or travelling in a part of the world where there's a risk of TBE, particularly if you're planning to visit rural areas or go hiking or camping. The vaccine, which is only available privately, provides protection against TBE in around nine out of every 10 people who receive it. Even if you've been vaccinated, you should still take precautions to reduce your risk of being bitten by an infected tick. For example, you should: wear long-sleeved tops and trousers tucked into your socks apply insect repellent containing DEET to exposed skin regularly check for ticks \u2013 common places to find them are around the hair line, behind the ears, on or around the elbows, the backs of the knees, the groin and the armpits Read more about preventing tick-borne encephalitis. Ticks in the UK You should also be aware that tick bites can spread other illnesses, such as Lyme disease, which you can get after being bitten by a tick in the UK. Therefore, follow the advice above to avoid tick bites when you and your family are in areas of the UK where ticks are commonly found.  Accessing healthcare abroad It's a good idea to keep a list of important telephone numbers with you when travelling abroad. These should include numbers for: the local emergency services a representative of the travel company you booked your visit with your travel insurer the British consulate or embassy in the area you're visiting \u2013 GOV.UK has a directory of British consulates and embassies You should also apply for a free European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) before travelling to Europe because it may give you access to reduced-cost medical treatment. Read more about accessing healthcare abroad. Page last reviewed: 09\/12\/2015 Next review due: 09\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 55 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Encephalitis Healthcare abroad Travel insurance Travel vaccinations External links Encephalitis Society Fit for Travel GOV.UK: foreign travel advice Travel Health Pro Encephalitis Read about encephalitis, a rare but serious condition that causes inflammation of the brain Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Travel sickness","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Motion-sickness","content":"Motion sickness - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Motion sickness  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Motion-sickness Clinical trials Motion sickness Introduction  Motion sickness is a term that describes an unpleasant combination of symptoms, such as dizziness, nausea and vomiting, that can occur when you're travelling. It\u2019s also sometimes known as travel sickness, seasickness, car sickness or air sickness. Initial symptoms of motion sickness may include: pale skin cold sweat dizziness an increase in saliva vomiting Some people also experience additional symptoms, such as: rapid, shallow breathing headaches drowsiness extreme tiredness In most cases, the symptoms of motion sickness will start to improve as your body adapts to the conditions causing the problem. For example, if you have motion sickness on a cruise ship, your symptoms may get better after a couple of days. However, some people don't adapt and have symptoms until they leave the environment that's causing them. Anyone can get motion sickness, but some are more vulnerable than others. Women often experience motion sickness, particularly during periods or pregnancy. People who often get migraines may also be more likely to experience motion sickness and to have a migraine at the same time. Motion sickness is also more common in children aged 3 to 12. After this age, most teenagers grow out of the condition. When to seek medical advice It's only necessary to seek medical advice about motion sickness if your symptoms continue after you stop travelling. Your GP will be able to rule out other possible causes of your symptoms, such as a viral infection of your inner ear (labyrinthitis). What causes motion sickness? Motion sickness is usually associated with travelling in a car, ship, plane or train. However, you can also get it on fairground rides and while watching or playing fast-paced films or computer games. Motion sickness is thought to occur when there's a conflict between what your eyes see and what your inner ears, which help with balance, sense. Your brain holds details about where you are and how you're moving. It constantly updates this with information from your eyes and vestibular system. The vestibular system is a network of nerves, channels and fluids in your inner ear, which gives your brain a sense of motion and balance. If there\u2019s a mismatch of information between these two systems, your brain can't update your current status and the resulting confusion will lead to symptoms of motion sickness, such as nausea and vomiting. For example, you can get motion sickness when travelling by car because your eyes tell your brain that you're travelling at more than 30 miles an hour, but your vestibular system tells your brain that you're sitting still. There's also an association between motion sickness and a type of migraine where dizziness, rather than headache, dominates. This is known as a vestibular migraine. If you experience dizzy spells and have a history of motion sickness, you may be diagnosed as having vestibular migraines. Treating motion sickness Mild symptoms of motion sickness can usually be improved using techniques such as fixing your eyes on the horizon or distracting yourself by listening to music. Other self care techniques you could try include: Keep still \u2013 if possible, choose a cabin or seat in the middle of a boat or plane, because this is where you'll experience the least movement. Use a pillow or headrest to help keep your head as still as possible. Look at a stable object \u2013 for example, the horizon. Reading or playing games may make your symptoms worse. Closing your eyes may help relieve symptoms. Fresh air \u2013 open windows or move to the top deck of a ship to avoid getting too hot and to get a good supply of fresh air. Relax \u2013 by listening to music while focusing on your breathing or carrying out a mental activity, such as counting backwards from 100. Stay calm \u2013 keep calm about the journey. You\u2019re more likely to get motion sickness if you worry about it. It\u2019s also a good idea to avoid eating a large meal or drinking alcohol before travelling. You should keep well hydrated throughout your journey by drinking water. Medication More severe motion sickness can be treated with medication. It's usually better to take medication for motion sickness before your journey to prevent symptoms developing. Hyoscine Hyoscine, also known as scopolamine, is widely used to treat motion sickness. It's thought to work by blocking some of the nerve signals sent from the vestibular system. Hyoscine is available over the counter from pharmacists. To be effective, you'll need to take it before travelling. If you're going on a long journey \u2013 for example, by sea \u2013 hyoscine patches can be applied to your skin every three days. Common side effects of hyoscine include drowsiness, blurred vision and dizziness. As hyoscine can cause drowsiness, avoid taking it if you're planning to drive. Hyoscine should also be used with caution in children, the elderly, and if you have certain conditions such as epilepsy or a history of heart, kidney or liver problems. Antihistamines Antihistamines are used to treat symptoms of allergies, but can also help to control nausea and vomiting. They\u2019re less effective at treating motion sickness than hyoscine, but may cause fewer side effects. They\u2019re usually taken as tablets one or two hours before your journey. If it's a long journey, you may need to take a dose every eight hours. Like hyoscine, some antihistamines can cause drowsiness. Your pharmacist can advise you. Complementary therapies Several complementary therapies have been suggested for motion sickness, although the evidence for their effectiveness is mixed. Ginger Ginger supplements, or other ginger products including ginger biscuits or ginger tea, may help to prevent symptoms of motion sickness. Ginger is sometimes used to treat other types of nausea, such as morning sickness during pregnancy. Although there's little scientific evidence to support the use of ginger to treat motion sickness, it has a long history of being used as a remedy for nausea and vomiting. Before taking ginger supplements, check with your GP that they won't affect any other medication you're taking. Acupressure bands Acupressure bands are stretchy bands worn around the wrists. They apply pressure to a particular point on the inside of your wrist between the two tendons on your inner arm. Some complementary therapists claim that using an acupressure band can help to treat motion sickness. Although acupressure bands don't cause any adverse side effects, there's little scientific evidence to show they're an effective treatment for motion sickness. Page last reviewed: 09\/12\/2014 Next review due: 09\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 282 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 84  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Altitude sickness How to have a healthy flight Jet lag Vertigo External links Fit for travel: travel advice NaTHNaC: advice for travellers Passports: apply or renew Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Travel vaccinations","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Travel-immunisation","content":"Travel vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Travel vaccinations  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Travel vaccinations Travel-immunisation Available jabs Introduction  If you're planning to travel outside the UK, you may need to be vaccinated against some of the serious diseases found in other parts of the world. Vaccinations are available to protect you against infections such as yellow fever, typhoid and hepatitis A. In the UK, the childhood vaccination programme protects you against a number of diseases, but doesn't cover most of the infectious diseases found overseas. Which jabs do I need? You can find out which vaccinations are necessary or recommended for the areas you'll be visiting on these two websites: NHS fitfortravel the National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) Some countries require you to have an International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis (ICVP) before you enter. For example, Saudi Arabia requires proof of vaccination against certain types of meningitis for visitors arriving for the Hajj and Umrah pilgrimages. Many tropical countries in Africa and South America won't accept travellers from an area where there's yellow fever unless they can prove they've been vaccinated against it. Read more about the vaccines available for travellers abroad. Where do I get my jabs? You should get advice at least eight weeks before you're due to travel, as some jabs need to be given well in advance. First, phone or visit your GP or practice nurse to find out whether your existing UK jabs are up-to-date (they can tell from your notes). Your GP or practice nurse may also be able to give you general advice about travel vaccinations and travel health, such as protecting yourself from malaria. Your GP or practice nurse can give you a booster of your UK jabs if you need one. They may be able to give you the travel jabs you need, either free on the NHS or for a charge. Alternatively, you can visit a local private travel vaccination clinic for your UK boosters and other travel jabs. Not all vaccinations are available free on the NHS, even if they're recommended for travel to a certain area. Free travel vaccinations The following travel vaccinations are usually available free on the NHS: diphtheria, polio and tetanus (combined booster) typhoid hepatitis A \u2013 including when combined with typhoid or hepatitis B cholera These vaccines are usually free because they protect against diseases thought to represent the greatest risk to public health if they were brought into the country. Private travel vaccinations You're likely to have to pay for travel vaccinations against: hepatitis B when not combined with hepatitis A Japanese encephalitis and tick-borne encephalitis meningitis vaccines  rabies tuberculosis (TB) yellow fever Yellow fever vaccines are only available from designated centres. The NaTHNaC website can help you find a clinic offering yellow fever vaccination. The cost of travel vaccines at private clinics will vary, but could be around £50 for each dose of a vaccine. It's worth considering this when budgeting for your trip. Things to consider There are several things to consider when planning your travel vaccinations, including: the country or countries you're visiting \u2013 some diseases are more common in certain parts of the world and less common in others  when you're travelling \u2013 some diseases are more common at certain times of the year; for example, during the rainy season where you're staying \u2013 in general, you'll be more at risk of disease in rural areas than in urban areas, and if you're backpacking and staying in hostels or camping, you may be more at risk than if you were on a package holiday and staying in a hotel how long you'll be staying \u2013 the longer your stay, the greater your risk of being exposed to diseases your age and health \u2013 some people may be more vulnerable to infection than others, while some vaccinations can't be given to people with certain medical conditions what you'll be doing during your stay \u2013 for example, whether you'll be spending a lot of time outdoors, such as trekking or working in rural areas if you're working as an aid worker \u2013 you may come into contact with more diseases if you're working in a refugee camp or helping after a natural disaster if you're working in a medical setting \u2013 for example, a doctor or nurse may require additional vaccinations if you are in contact with animals \u2013 in this case, you may be more at risk of getting diseases spread by animals, such as rabies If you're only travelling to countries in northern and central Europe, North America or Australia, you're unlikely to need any vaccinations. If possible, see your GP at least eight weeks before you're due to travel. Some vaccinations need to be given well in advance to allow your body to develop immunity. Some also involve multiple doses spread over several weeks. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Speak to your GP before having any vaccinations if: you're pregnant you think you might be pregnant you're breastfeeding In many cases, it's unlikely a vaccine given while pregnant or breastfeeding will cause problems for the baby. However, your GP will be able to give you further advice about this. People with immune deficiencies For some people travelling overseas, vaccination against certain diseases may not be advised. This may be the case if: you have a condition that affects your body's immune system, such as HIV or AIDS you're receiving treatment that affects your immune system, such as chemotherapy you've recently had a bone marrow or organ transplant Your GP can give you further advice about this. Non-travel vaccines As well as getting any travel vaccinations you need, it's also a good opportunity to make sure your other vaccinations are up-to-date and have booster jabs if necessary. Your GP surgery can check your existing vaccination records. People in certain risk groups may be offered extra vaccines. These include vaccinations against diseases such as hepatitis B, tuberculosis (TB), flu and chickenpox. Read more information on NHS vaccines for adults and children to find out whether you should have any. Page last reviewed: 16\/11\/2015 Next review due: 16\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 716 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 165  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 302  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Travel health Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A simple guide to health precautions when travelling abroad, including vaccinations, taking condoms and a first aid kit, and being careful about drinking water. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Healthcare abroad Travel health Travel illnesses Vaccination guide External links fitfortravel GOV.UK: apply for or renew a passport GOV.UK: foreign travel advice GOV.UK: foreign travel advice for people with mental health needs National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) Travax Yellow Card Scheme Before you travel Advice for people travelling abroad, covering jet lag, vaccinations, DVT, travel insurance and sun safety Malaria Approximately 1,500 travellers return to the UK with malaria every year. Find out more about the symptoms and causes, and how you can protect yourself When to have your vaccinations Find out which vaccinations are routinely offered on the NHS and at what age they are needed NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Traveller's diarrhoea","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Diarrhoea","content":"Diarrhoea - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Diarrhoea  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Diarrhoea Real stories Diarrhoea Clinical trials Diarrhoea Diarrhoea Symptoms Diarrhoea Causes Diarrhoea Diagnosis Diarrhoea Treatment Diarrhoea Prevention Introduction  Diarrhoea is passing looser or more frequent stools than is normal for you. It affects most people from time to time and is usually nothing to worry about. However, it can be distressing and unpleasant until it passes, which normally takes a few days to a week. What causes diarrhoea? There are many different causes of diarrhoea, but a bowel infection (gastroenteritis) is a common cause in both adults and children. Gastroenteritis can be caused by: a virus \u2013 such as norovirus or rotavirus bacteria \u2013 such as campylobacter and Escherichia coli (E. coli), which are often picked up from contaminated food  a parasite \u2013 such as the parasite that causes giardiasis, which is spread in contaminated water These infections can sometimes be caught during travel abroad, particularly to areas with poor standards of public hygiene. This is known as travellers' diarrhoea. Diarrhoea can also be the result of anxiety, a food allergy, medication, or a long-term condition, such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Read more about the causes of diarrhoea. What to do if you have diarrhoea Most cases of diarrhoea clear up after a few days without treatment, and you may not need to see your GP. However, diarrhoea can lead to dehydration, so you should drink plenty of fluids \u2013 small, frequent sips of water \u2013 until it passes. It's very important that babies and small children do not become dehydrated. Your pharmacist may suggest you use an oral rehydration solution (ORS) if you or your child are particularly at risk of dehydration. You should eat solid food as soon as you feel able to. If you're breastfeeding or bottle feeding your baby and they have diarrhoea, you should try to feed them as normal. Stay at home until at least 48 hours after the last episode of diarrhoea to prevent spreading any infection to others. Medications to reduce diarrhoea, such as loperamide, are available. However, these are not usually necessary, and most types should not be given to children. Read more about treating diarrhoea. When to see your GP Contact your GP or call NHS 111 for advice if you're concerned about yourself or your child. It's important to see your GP if the diarrhoea is particularly frequent or severe, or associated with other symptoms, such as: blood in your or your child's poo persistent vomiting a severe or continuous stomach ache weight loss signs of dehydration \u2013 including drowsiness, passing urine infrequently, and feeling lightheaded or dizzy your poo is dark or black \u2013 this may be a sign of bleeding inside your stomach You should also contact your GP if your or your child's diarrhoea is particularly persistent, as this may be a sign of a more serious problem. In most cases, diarrhoea should pass within about a week. Read more about when to contact your GP and diagnosing diarrhoea. Preventing diarrhoea Diarrhoea is often caused by an infection. You can reduce your risk by making sure you maintain high standards of hygiene. For example, you should: wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water after going to the toilet and before eating or preparing food clean the toilet, including the handle and the seat, with disinfectant after each bout of diarrhoea avoid sharing towels, flannels, cutlery, or utensils with other household members It's also important to practise good food and water hygiene while travelling abroad, such as avoiding potentially unsafe tap water and undercooked food. Read more about preventing diarrhoea. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/11\/2014 Next review due: 26\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1076 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 350  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 260  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 276  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dehydration Diarrhoea and vomiting in children Digestive health Gastroenteritis How should I collect and store a stool sample? What if I'm on the pill and have diarrhoea? External links IBS Network: what is IBS? Lab Tests Online UK: stool sample NHS Fit for Travel: travellers' diarrhoea Diarrhoea and vomiting in children Find out what causes diarrhoea and vomiting in children, and how to treat it Food safety How to prevent food poisoning at home, including E. coli, with advice on food safety and keeping germs in check Digestive health Find out how to beat common digestive problems like bloating and indigestion NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Typhoid fever","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Typhoid-fever","content":"Typhoid fever - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Typhoid fever  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Typhoid-fever Real stories Typhoid-fever Clinical trials Typhoid fever Typhoid-fever Symptoms Typhoid-fever Causes Typhoid-fever Diagnosis Typhoid-fever Treatment Typhoid-fever Complications Typhoid-fever Vaccination Introduction  Typhoid fever is a bacterial infection that can spread throughout the body, affecting many organs. Without prompt treatment, it can cause serious complications and can be fatal. It's caused by a bacterium called Salmonella typhi, which is related to the bacteria that cause salmonella food poisoning. Typhoid fever is highly contagious. An infected person can pass the bacteria out of their body in their stools (faeces) or, less commonly, in their urine. If someone else eats food or drinks water that's been contaminated with a small amount of infected faeces or urine, they can become infected with the bacteria and develop typhoid fever. Read more about the causes of typhoid fever. Who's affected? Typhoid fever is most common in parts of the world that have poor sanitation and limited access to clean water (at the bottom of this page is a list of high-risk areas). Worldwide, children are thought to be most at risk of developing typhoid fever. This may be because their immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness) is still developing. However, children with typhoid fever tend to have milder symptoms than adults. Typhoid fever is uncommon in the UK, with an estimated 500 cases occurring each year. In most of these cases, the person developed the infection while visiting relatives in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. However, you're also at risk of developing the infection if you visit Asia, Africa and South America. Signs and symptoms of typhoid fever Common symptoms of typhoid fever include: a high temperature that can reach 39-40C (103-104F) stomach pain headache constipation or diarrhoea If typhoid fever isn't treated, the symptoms will continue to get worse over the following weeks and the risk of developing potentially fatal complications will increase. Read more about the symptoms of typhoid fever and the complications of typhoid fever. How typhoid fever is treated Typhoid fever requires prompt treatment with antibiotics. If diagnosed at an early stage, the infection is likely to be mild and can usually be treated at home with a 7- to 14-day course of antibiotic tablets. More serious cases of typhoid fever usually require admission to hospital, so antibiotic injections can be given. With prompt antibiotic treatment, most people will start to feel better within a few days and serious complications are very rare. Deaths from typhoid fever are now virtually unheard of in the UK. If typhoid fever isn't treated, it's estimated that up to one in five people with the condition will die. Some of those who survive will have complications caused by the infection. Read more about treating typhoid fever. Typhoid fever vaccination In the UK, two vaccines are available that can provide some protection against typhoid fever. These involve either having a single injection or taking three capsules over alternate days. Vaccination is recommended for anyone planning to travel to parts of the world where typhoid fever is widespread (see below). It's particularly important if you're planning to live or work closely with local people. However, as neither vaccine offers 100% protection, it's also important to follow some precautions when travelling. For example, you should only drink bottled or boiled water, and avoid foods that could potentially be contaminated. Read more about the typhoid fever vaccination. High-risk areas The areas with the highest rates of typhoid fever are: the Indian subcontinent Africa South and South East Asia South America the Middle East Europe Central America When travelling to a foreign country, it's a good idea to make a list of relevant contact details and telephone numbers, in case of an emergency. Read more about travel health and travel advice by country on the GOV.UK website. Page last reviewed: 06\/07\/2015 Next review due: 06\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 319 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 146  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food and water abroad Healthcare abroad Travel health Travel illnesses and vaccinations Travel vaccinations External links Fit for Travel GOV.UK: foreign travel advice NaTHNaC: travellers Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Food and water abroad Find out how to protect yourself against illnesses in contaminated food and water Find and choose services for Typhoid fever Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Yellow fever","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Yellow-fever","content":"Yellow fever - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Yellow fever  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Yellow-fever Clinical trials Yellow fever Yellow-fever Vaccination Introduction  Yellow fever is a serious viral infection that is spread by certain types of mosquito. It\u2019s mainly found in sub-Saharan Africa, South America and parts of the Caribbean. The condition can be prevented with a vaccination and is a very rare cause of illness in travellers. Six travellers from Europe and North America have died from yellow fever since 1996. None of them were vaccinated. If you're planning to visit places where yellow fever infection is found, you should seek travel health advice about the vaccination available. A map and list of countries where yellow fever is found is available on the NHS Fit for Travel website. How yellow fever is spread The virus that causes yellow fever is passed to humans through the bites of infected mosquitoes. The mosquitoes that spread the infection are usually active and bite during daylight hours, from dusk until dawn, and are found in both urban and rural areas. Yellow fever can\u2019t be passed directly from person to person through close contact. Yellow fever symptoms The symptoms of yellow fever occur in two stages. The initial symptoms develop three to six days after infection, and can include: a high temperature (fever) a headache nausea or vomiting muscle pain, including backache  loss of appetite This stage will usually pass after three to four days and most people will make a full recovery. However, around 15% of people go on to develop more serious problems, including jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes), kidney failure and bleeding from the mouth, nose, eyes or stomach (causing blood in your vomit and stools). Up to half of those who experience these symptoms will die. When to seek medical advice You should see a doctor as soon as possible if you develop symptoms of yellow fever and are currently travelling in an area where the virus is found, or have recently returned from one of these areas. To help determine whether you have yellow fever, the doctor will want to know exactly where you have been travelling and what symptoms you have. A blood test will be needed to confirm the diagnosis. Treating yellow fever There is no specific treatment for yellow fever, but the symptoms can be treated while your body fights off the virus. Headache, high temperature and muscle pain can be treated using painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. You should also drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration. If your symptoms are particularly severe, you may be admitted to hospital so that your condition can be monitored and you can receive supportive care. Yellow fever vaccination The vaccination against yellow fever should be given at least 10 days before travelling to an area where the infection is found, to allow your body to develop protection against the virus that causes the infection. Some countries require a proof of vaccination certificate before they will let you enter the country. This will only become valid 10 days after you are vaccinated. The yellow fever vaccination is given as a single injection and it offers protection to over 95% of those who have it. The protection offered by the vaccine may be life-long, but vaccination certificates are currently only valid for 10 years, and a booster dose may sometimes be needed after this time if you are planning another visit to an area where yellow fever is found. Even if you have been vaccinated, it\u2019s still a good idea to take steps to prevent mosquito bites while you\u2019re travelling \u2013 for example, by using mosquito nets, wearing loose, long-sleeved clothing, and applying insect repellent containing 50% DEET to exposed skin. Read more about the yellow fever vaccination. Information about you If you have yellow fever, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 16\/01\/2015 Next review due: 16\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 238 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 124  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Travel health Travel vaccinations Healthcare abroad External links Fit for Travel: yellow fever Fit for Travel: yellow fever risk areas HPS: yellow fever vaccination centres in Scotland NaTHNaC: find a yellow fever vaccination centre WHO: yellow fever NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tremor (essential)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tremor-(essential)","content":"Essential tremor - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Essential tremor  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tremor-(essential) Clinical trials Essential tremor Tremor-(essential) Treatment Introduction  Essential tremor is a type of uncontrollable shake or tremble of part of the body. Most people with essential tremor experience a trembling, up-and-down movement of the hands. The arms, head, eyelids, lips and other muscles can also be affected. A tremor in the voice box (larynx) may cause a shaky voice. Essential tremor is usually more noticeable when you're trying to hold a position or do something with your hands, such as write. It doesn't always affect both sides of the body equally. Essential tremor is a common movement disorder affecting around four out of 100 adults over 40 years of age. Some people only have a mild tremor at first, which usually gets more severe over time. 'Normal' tremor Everyone has a very minor tremor when carrying out daily activities. For example, your hands will shake slightly when you hold them out in front of you. This is normal. Sometimes, the everyday level of tremor can become more noticeable, particularly in older people. Noticeable tremor is also normal and it's often caused by a raised level of adrenaline in the body, which can happen when a person is stressed, anxious or angry. When does a tremor become a problem? Essential tremor is more severe than normal tremor and it gradually gets worse over time. Eventually, the tremor may become so severe that carrying out normal, everyday activities can become difficult. Certain things may temporarily increase any tremor, including: tiredness caused by strenuous activity or lack of sleep smoking caffeine \u2013 from tea, coffee and some fizzy drinks being very hot or cold taking certain medicines \u2013 including some antidepressants and treatments for asthma When to see your GP It's important to visit your GP if you experience frequent or severe tremors. Although there's no specific test to diagnose essential tremor, your GP can carry out a physical examination and may request further tests to rule out other conditions (see causes, below). They'll also ask about your personal and family medical history as part of their assessment. Treating essential tremor There's no cure for essential tremor, but medicines can be used to help improve the symptoms in at least half of people with the condition. In rare cases, a severe tremor may be treated with surgery if it doesn't respond to medication. Read more about treating essential tremor. Inherited essential tremor Essential tremor can run in families and research suggests it's passed on by a faulty gene. At least half of people with the condition have a family member who also has it.  However, the age at which a tremor develops and its severity can vary greatly between different family members. Some people may also develop the faulty gene without inheriting it from either parent. Other causes of tremor There are a number of conditions which may cause tremor, including: overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism) Parkinson's disease, a long-term condition affecting the way the brain co-ordinates body movements multiple sclerosis, a condition of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) affecting the senses and the body's actions dystonia, a range of movement disorders which cause involuntary muscle spasms stroke, which very rarely may result in tremor with few other symptoms peripheral neuropathy, where the peripheral nervous system is damaged A tremor can also be one of the withdrawal symptoms for people who are dependant on alcohol and have stopped or reduced their alcohol intake. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 13\/01\/2015 Next review due: 13\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 462 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 199  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 156  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dystonia Multiple sclerosis Overactive thyroid Paralysis Parkinson's disease Stroke External links National Tremor Foundation International Essential Tremor Foundation NICE: deep brain stimulation for tremor and dystonia Pharmacy and medicines Using your local pharmacy's services could save you an unnecessary trip to your GP NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trichomonas vaginalis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/trichomonas_vaginalis","content":"Trichomoniasis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trichomoniasis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trichomoniasis Trichomonas_vaginalis Diagnosis Trichomonas_vaginalis Treatment Trichomonas_vaginalis Prevention Introduction  Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a tiny parasite called Trichomonas vaginalis (TV). Symptoms of trichomoniasis usually develop within a month of infection, although up to half of all infected men and women have no symptoms. The symptoms of trichomoniasis are similar to those of many other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) so it can sometimes be difficult to diagnose. Symptoms in women Trichomoniasis in women can cause any of the following symptoms: abnormal vaginal discharge that may be thick, thin or frothy and yellow-green in colour producing more discharge than normal, which may also have an unpleasant fishy smell soreness, inflammation (swelling) and itching around the vagina \u2013 sometimes the inner thighs also become itchy pain or discomfort when passing urine or having sex Symptoms in men Trichomoniasis in men can cause any of the following symptoms: pain during urination or ejaculation needing to urinate more frequently than usual  thin white discharge from the penis soreness, swelling and redness around the head of the penis (balanitis) or foreskin (balano-posthitis) When to seek medical advice Visit your GP or local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic if you develop any of the symptoms of trichomoniasis or if you think you may be infected. Trichomoniasis can usually be diagnosed after an examination of the genitals and a laboratory test carried out on a swab taken from the vagina or penis. If the test shows you have trichomoniasis, it's important that your current sexual partner and any other recent partners are also tested and treated. Read more about diagnosing trichomoniasis. How do you get trichomoniasis? Trichomoniasis is caused by a tiny parasite called Trichomonas vaginalis.   In women, this parasite mainly infects the vagina and urethra (tube that carries urine out of the body). In men, the infection most commonly affects the urethra, but the head of the penis or prostate gland (a gland near the bladder that helps produce semen) can become infected in some cases. The parasite is usually spread by having unprotected sex (sex without a condom). It could also be spread by sharing sex toys if you don't wash them or cover them with a new condom before use. You don't have to have many sexual partners to catch trichomoniasis. Anyone who is sexually active can catch it and pass it on. Trichomoniasis isn't thought to be passed on through: oral or anal sex kissing or hugging sharing cups, plates or cutlery toilet seats The best way to prevent trichomoniasis is to have safer sex. This means always using a condom when having sex, covering any sex toys you use with a condom, and washing sex toys after use. Read more about preventing trichomoniasis. Treating trichomoniasis Trichomoniasis is unlikely to go away without treatment, but it can be effectively treated with antibiotics. Most men and women are treated with an antibiotic called metronidazole, which is usually taken twice a day for five to seven days. It's important to complete the whole course of antibiotics and avoid having sex until the infection clears up, to prevent reinfection. Your current sexual partner and any other recent partners should also be treated. Read more about treating trichomoniasis. Complications of trichomoniasis Complications of trichomoniasis are rare, although some women with the infection may be at an increased risk of further problems. If you're infected with trichomoniasis while you're pregnant, the infection may cause your baby to be either:  born prematurely (before the 37th week of pregnancy) have a low birth weight Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/12\/2015 Next review due: 08\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 321 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 101  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Sexual health Contraception guide External links British Association for Sexual Health and HIV Brook: advice for under 25s FPA Lab Tests Online UK: Trichomonas test Vaginal discharge Use this guide to find out whether you have an infection Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trichomoniasis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/trichomonas_vaginalis","content":"Trichomoniasis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trichomoniasis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trichomoniasis Trichomonas_vaginalis Diagnosis Trichomonas_vaginalis Treatment Trichomonas_vaginalis Prevention Introduction  Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a tiny parasite called Trichomonas vaginalis (TV). Symptoms of trichomoniasis usually develop within a month of infection, although up to half of all infected men and women have no symptoms. The symptoms of trichomoniasis are similar to those of many other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) so it can sometimes be difficult to diagnose. Symptoms in women Trichomoniasis in women can cause any of the following symptoms: abnormal vaginal discharge that may be thick, thin or frothy and yellow-green in colour producing more discharge than normal, which may also have an unpleasant fishy smell soreness, inflammation (swelling) and itching around the vagina \u2013 sometimes the inner thighs also become itchy pain or discomfort when passing urine or having sex Symptoms in men Trichomoniasis in men can cause any of the following symptoms: pain during urination or ejaculation needing to urinate more frequently than usual  thin white discharge from the penis soreness, swelling and redness around the head of the penis (balanitis) or foreskin (balano-posthitis) When to seek medical advice Visit your GP or local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic if you develop any of the symptoms of trichomoniasis or if you think you may be infected. Trichomoniasis can usually be diagnosed after an examination of the genitals and a laboratory test carried out on a swab taken from the vagina or penis. If the test shows you have trichomoniasis, it's important that your current sexual partner and any other recent partners are also tested and treated. Read more about diagnosing trichomoniasis. How do you get trichomoniasis? Trichomoniasis is caused by a tiny parasite called Trichomonas vaginalis.   In women, this parasite mainly infects the vagina and urethra (tube that carries urine out of the body). In men, the infection most commonly affects the urethra, but the head of the penis or prostate gland (a gland near the bladder that helps produce semen) can become infected in some cases. The parasite is usually spread by having unprotected sex (sex without a condom). It could also be spread by sharing sex toys if you don't wash them or cover them with a new condom before use. You don't have to have many sexual partners to catch trichomoniasis. Anyone who is sexually active can catch it and pass it on. Trichomoniasis isn't thought to be passed on through: oral or anal sex kissing or hugging sharing cups, plates or cutlery toilet seats The best way to prevent trichomoniasis is to have safer sex. This means always using a condom when having sex, covering any sex toys you use with a condom, and washing sex toys after use. Read more about preventing trichomoniasis. Treating trichomoniasis Trichomoniasis is unlikely to go away without treatment, but it can be effectively treated with antibiotics. Most men and women are treated with an antibiotic called metronidazole, which is usually taken twice a day for five to seven days. It's important to complete the whole course of antibiotics and avoid having sex until the infection clears up, to prevent reinfection. Your current sexual partner and any other recent partners should also be treated. Read more about treating trichomoniasis. Complications of trichomoniasis Complications of trichomoniasis are rare, although some women with the infection may be at an increased risk of further problems. If you're infected with trichomoniasis while you're pregnant, the infection may cause your baby to be either:  born prematurely (before the 37th week of pregnancy) have a low birth weight Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/12\/2015 Next review due: 08\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 321 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 101  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Useful links NHS Choices links Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Sexual health Contraception guide External links British Association for Sexual Health and HIV Brook: advice for under 25s FPA Lab Tests Online UK: Trichomonas test Vaginal discharge Use this guide to find out whether you have an infection Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trichotillomania","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/trichotillomania","content":"Trichotillomania - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trichotillomania  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview trichotillomania Clinical trials Trichotillomania trichotillomania Symptoms trichotillomania Causes trichotillomania Diagnosis trichotillomania Treatment trichotillomania Complications Introduction  Trichotillomania is a condition where a person feels compelled to pull their hair out. They may pull out the hair on their head or in other places, such as their eyebrows or eyelashes. Trichotillomania is an impulse-control disorder, a psychological condition where the person is unable to stop themselves carrying out a particular action. They will experience an intense urge to pull their hair out and growing tension until they do. After pulling out hair, they'll feel a sense of relief. Pulling out hair on the head leaves bald patches. Trichotillomania can cause negative feelings, such as guilt. The person may also feel embarrassed or ashamed about pulling their hair out, and may try to deny it or cover it up. Sometimes trichotillomania can make the person feel unattractive and can lead to low self-esteem. Impulse-control disorders are more common among teenagers and young adults. Trichotillomania tends to affect girls more than boys. Read more about the symptoms of trichotillomania. What causes trichotillomania? It's not known what causes trichotillomania, but there are several theories. Some experts think hair pulling is a type of addiction. The more you pull your hair out, the more you want to keep doing it. Trichotillomania may be a reflection of a mental health problem. Psychological and behavioural theories suggest that hair pulling may be a way of relieving stress or anxiety. In some cases, trichotillomania may be a form of self-harm, where the person deliberately injures themselves as a way of seeking temporary relief from emotional distress. Read more about the causes of trichotillomania. Seeing your GP See your GP if you're pulling your hair out or if you notice that your child is. Your GP may examine areas where the hair is missing to check nothing else is causing the hair to come out, such as a skin infection. In trichotillomania, bald patches are an unusual shape and may affect one side more than the other. Read more about how trichotillomania is diagnosed. Treating trichotillomania Little medical research has been conducted into treatments for trichotillomania. The most effective treatment is therapy to change the hair-pulling behaviour, combined with a network of emotional support. Psychotherapy is a type of talking therapy that can be used to treat emotional problems and mental health conditions. It involves discussing emotional issues with a trained therapist. In particular, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a type of psychotherapy that may be recommended. It helps you manage your problems by changing how you think and act. CBT often involves behavioural therapy, also known as habit-reversal therapy, which aims to help you change the way you behave \u2013 for example, by reducing your hair-pulling behaviour. Read more about treating trichotillomania. Complications of trichotillomania Trichotillomania can have a significant impact on the person's quality of life, and can also cause medical problems. It can often cause feelings of guilt, shame, isolation or embarrassment, which can affect their social life and have an adverse impact on their performance at school or work. Read more about the complications of trichotillomania. Support If you have trichotillomania, it's important you receive emotional help and support. This can be from family, friends or self-help groups. Organisations such as Trichotillomania Support are good places to start if you're looking for support. Community content from HealthUnlocked Teen girls 15-18 Read about teen girl health issues, including healthy eating, skin problems and having sex for the first time Page last reviewed: 19\/11\/2014 Next review due: 19\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 195 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anxiety Cognitive behavioural therapy Obsessive compulsive disorder Self-harm Stress management Teen boys' health Teen girls' health External links Alopecia UK: appearance tips Anxiety Care UK: trichotillomania Teens Health: trichotillomania Trichotillomania Support Online Find mental health support Anxious, depressed or having problems coping? Find out how to get help Moodzone Feeling stressed, anxious or depressed? NHS Choices Moodzone can help you on your way to feeling better NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trigeminal neuralgia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Trigeminal-neuralgia","content":"Trigeminal neuralgia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trigeminal neuralgia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trigeminal-neuralgia Community Trigeminal neuralgia Trigeminal-neuralgia Symptoms Trigeminal-neuralgia Causes Trigeminal-neuralgia Diagnosis Trigeminal-neuralgia Treatment Introduction  Trigeminal neuralgia is a sudden, severe facial pain, described as sharp, shooting or like an electric shock. It usually occurs in sudden short attacks lasting from a few seconds to about two minutes, which stop just as abruptly. In the vast majority of cases it affects part or all of one side of the face, with the pain most commonly felt in the lower part of the face. Very occasionally it affects both sides of the face, but not normally at the same time. People with the condition may experience attacks of pain regularly for days, weeks or months at a time. In severe cases, attacks may occur hundreds of times a day. It's possible for the pain to improve or even disappear altogether for several months or years at a time (known as a period of remission), although these periods of remission tend to get shorter with time. Some people may then go on to develop a more continuous aching, throbbing and burning sensation, sometimes accompanied by the sharp attacks. Typically, the attacks of pain are brought on by activities that involve lightly touching the face, such as washing, eating and brushing the teeth, but they can also be triggered by wind (even a slight breeze or air conditioning) or movement of the face or head. Sometimes, the pain can occur without any trigger whatsoever. Living with trigeminal neuralgia can be very difficult and it can have a significant impact on a person's quality of life, resulting in problems such as weight loss, isolation and depression. Read more about the symptoms of trigeminal neuralgia. When to seek medical advice You should see your GP if you experience frequent or persistent facial pain, particularly if standard painkillers such as paracetamol and ibuprofen do not help and a dentist has ruled out any dental causes. Your GP will try to identify the problem by asking about your symptoms and ruling out conditions that could be responsible for your pain. However, diagnosing trigeminal neuralgia can be difficult, and it can take a few years for a diagnosis to be confirmed. Read more about diagnosing trigeminal neuralgia. What causes trigeminal neuralgia? In the vast majority of cases, trigeminal neuralgia is caused by compression of the trigeminal nerve. This is the largest nerve inside the skull, which transmits sensations of pain and touch from your face, teeth and mouth to your brain. This compression is usually caused by a nearby blood vessel pressing on part of the nerve inside the skull. In rare cases, trigeminal neuralgia can occur as a result of damage to the trigeminal nerve, caused by an underlying condition such as multiple sclerosis (MS) or a tumour. Read more about the causes of trigeminal neuralgia. Who is affected It's not clear exactly how many people are affected by trigeminal neuralgia, but the condition is thought to be rare. Some studies have suggested that around 27 in every 100,000 people are diagnosed with the condition in the UK each year, although this figure is probably too high as the condition tends to be over-diagnosed by doctors. Other estimates have suggested that there are about 6,500 new cases diagnosed each year in the UK. The condition affects women more often than men and is rare in people under the age of 40, although it can occur in younger people. Most cases are first seen in people between the ages of 50 and 60. How trigeminal neuralgia is treated Trigeminal neuralgia is usually a long-term condition, and the periods of remission often get shorter over time. However, most cases can be controlled to at least some degree with treatment. The first treatment offered will usually be with an anticonvulsant medication (usually used to treat epilepsy) called carbamazepine. To be effective, this medication needs to be taken several times a day, with the dose gradually increased over the course of a few days or weeks so that high enough levels of the medication can build up in your bloodstream. Unless your pain starts to diminish or disappears altogether, the medication is usually continued for as long as is necessary, sometimes for many years. If you are entering a period of remission and your pain goes away, stopping the medication should always be done slowly over days or weeks, unless you are advised otherwise by a doctor. Carbamazepine was not originally designed to treat pain, but it can help relieve nerve pain by slowing down electrical impulses in the nerves and reducing their ability to transmit pain messages. If this medication is ineffective, unsuitable or causes too many side effects, you may be referred to a specialist to discuss alternative medications or surgical procedures that may help. There are a number of minor surgical procedures that can be used to treat trigeminal neuralgia \u2013 usually by damaging the nerve to stop it sending pain signals \u2013 but these are generally only effective for a few years. Alternatively, your specialist may recommend having surgery to open up your skull and move away any blood vessels compressing the trigeminal nerve. Research suggests this operation offers the best results in terms of long-term pain relief, but it is a major operation and carries a risk of potentially serious complications, such as hearing loss, facial numbness or, very rarely, a stroke. Read more about treating trigeminal neuralgia. Postherpetic neuralgia This article focuses on trigeminal neuralgia, a rare type of neuralgia most commonly seen in people between the ages of 50 and 60. Postherpetic neuralgia is a more common type of neuralgia that usually develops after a previous shingles infection. Read more about postherpetic neuralgia. Page last reviewed: 22\/07\/2014 Next review due: 22\/07\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 339 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 159  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with pain MRI scan Multiple sclerosis Postherpetic neuralgia External links Brain & Spine Foundation: face pain NINDS: trigeminal neuralgia The Pain Toolkit Trigeminal Neuralgia Association UK How to get NHS help for long-term pain Find out how to get help from your GP or local hospital if you have persistent pain Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trigger finger","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Trigger-finger","content":"Trigger finger - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trigger finger  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trigger-finger Clinical trials Introduction  Trigger finger is a condition that affects one or more of the hand's tendons, making it difficult to bend the affected finger or thumb. If the tendon becomes swollen and inflamed it can 'catch' in the tunnel it runs through (the tendon sheath). This can make it difficult to move the affected finger or thumb and can result in a clicking sensation. Trigger finger is also known as stenosing tenosynovitis or stenosing tenovaginosis. It usually affects the thumb, ring finger or little finger. One or more fingers can be affected, and the problem may develop in both hands. It's more common in the right hand, which may be because most people are right-handed. Symptoms of trigger finger can include pain at the base of the affected finger or thumb when you move it or press on it, and stiffness or clicking when you move the affected finger or thumb, particularly first thing in the morning. If the condition gets worse, your finger may get stuck in a bent position and then suddenly pop straight. Eventually, it may not fully bend or straighten. See your GP if you think you may have trigger finger. They'll examine your hand and advise you about appropriate treatments. What causes trigger finger? Tendons are tough cords that join bone to muscle. They move the bone when the muscle contracts. In the hand, tendons run along the front and back of the bones in the fingers and are attached to the muscles in the forearm. The tendons on the palm side of the hand (flexor tendons) are held in place by strong bands of tissue, known as ligaments, which are shaped in arches over the tendon. The tendons are covered by a protective sheath which produces a small amount of fluid to keep the tendons lubricated. This allows them to move freely and smoothly within the sheath when the fingers are bent and straightened. Trigger finger occurs if there's a problem with the tendon or sheath, such as inflammation and swelling. The tendon can no longer slide easily through the sheath and can bunch up to form a small lump (nodule). This makes bending the affected finger or thumb difficult. If the tendon gets caught in the sheath, the finger can click painfully as it's straightened. The exact reason why these problems occur isn't known, but several factors may increase the likelihood of trigger finger developing. For example, it's more common in women, people over 40 years of age, and those with certain medical conditions. Another hand-related condition called Dupuytren\u2019s contracture can also increase your risk of developing trigger finger. In Dupuytren's contracture, the connective tissue in the palm of the hand thickens, causing one or more fingers to bend into the palm of the hand. Long-term conditions, such as diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis, are also sometimes associated with trigger finger. Read more about the causes of trigger finger. How trigger finger is treated In some people, trigger finger may get better without treatment. However, if it isn't treated, there's a chance the affected finger or thumb could become permanently bent, which will make performing everyday tasks difficult. If treatment is necessary, several options are available, including: Rest and medication \u2013 avoiding certain activities and taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may help relieve pain. Splinting, where the affected finger is strapped to a plastic splint to reduce movement. Corticosteroid injections (steroids are medicines that can reduce swelling). Surgery on the affected sheath \u2013 surgery involves releasing the affected sheath to allow the tendon to move freely again. It's usually used when other treatments have failed. It can be up to 100% effective, although you may need to take two to four weeks off work to fully recover. Read more about treating trigger finger. Trigger finger in children Trigger finger is generally less common in children than in adults, but sometimes young children aged between six months and two years develop it. It can affect the child's ability to straighten their thumb, but it's rarely painful and usually gets better without treatment. Page last reviewed: 01\/09\/2015 Next review due: 01\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 684 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 399  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 161  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Anatomy of the hand 1. Inflamed tendon 2. Carpal ligament 3. Normal tendon Useful links NHS Choices links Corticosteroids Hand pain NSAIDs Repetitive strain injury (RSI) External links BSSH: common hand conditions Dupuytren's contracture Read about Dupuytren's contracture - a condition that affects the hands and fingers and causes one or more fingers to bend into the palm of the hand Find and choose services for Trigger finger Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trimethylaminuria ('fish odour syndrome')","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/trimethylaminuria","content":"Trimethylaminuria ('fish odour syndrome') - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trimethylaminuria ('fish odour syndrome')  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trimethylaminuria Introduction  Trimethylaminuria is an uncommon genetic disorder that causes a strong body odour usually described as like rotting fish, faeces or garbage. The odour is created when the body isn't able to process trimethylamine. This is a smelly chemical that's produced in the gut, particularly when certain choline-rich foods are digested. What are the signs and symptoms? If you have trimethylaminuria, the chemical trimethylamine builds up in your body and you'll give off a strong odour in your sweat, urine, saliva and vaginal fluids. There are usually no other symptoms. Some people have a strong odour all the time but, in most cases, it varies in intensity over time. The smell usually first becomes apparent in childhood when children are weaned. This is because certain foods are responsible for the odour (see below). However, it sometimes starts in adulthood.  Some children with trimethylaminuria may only have a temporary form of the disorder that suddenly clears after months or years. What is the cause? The bacteria in our bowel help us to digest foods such as eggs, beans and seafood. In the process, they produce a strong-smelling chemical called trimethylamine. Normally, an enzyme (protein) called flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) is produced by the liver to turn trimethylamine into the odourless molecule trimethylamine N-oxide. Most people have an FMO3 gene, which provides instructions for making this enzyme. Faulty gene In most people with trimethylaminuria, the FMO3 enzyme is missing or their FMO3 gene doesn't work as well as other people's. This allows trimethylamine to build up in the body. Usually, those with trimethylaminuria have inherited the faulty FMO3 gene from both their parents. In other words, each parent will carry one copy of the faulty gene and be a \"carrier\" of the condition. Carrier parents may not have symptoms themselves, or may only have mild or temporary episodes of body odour. It's estimated that 1% of the UK population are carriers of the faulty gene that causes trimethylaminuria. Other causes Not everyone with trimethylaminuria has the faulty FMO3 gene. Some cases may be caused by an excess of certain proteins in the diet, or an abnormal increase in the gut bacteria that produce trimethylamine. A few cases of trimethylaminuria have been linked with liver or kidney disease, where the FMO3 enzyme is underactive. Women are more likely than men to have the condition \u2013 possibly because female sex hormones such as progesterone and oestrogen aggravate the symptoms. Some cases appear to be worse around puberty and, in women, at the following times: just before or after periods after taking the contraceptive pill around the menopause Temporary symptoms of this condition have also been identified in a small number of premature infants. Stress and diet may also play a role in triggering the odour. How is trimethylaminuria diagnosed? Trimethylaminuria is diagnosed with a urine test that measures the ratio of trimethylamine (the fishy-smelling chemical) to trimethylamine N-oxide (the odourless version). If you have trimethylaminuria, you'll have higher-than-normal levels of trimethylamine in your urine. The urine test is carried out the day after a 'choline load'. This involves eating a suggested meal including foods high in choline, such as: salt-water fish eggs baked beans or soya beans liver Gene testing can also be carried out, to look for any genetic changes in the FMO3 gene. Read more about genetic testing. How is trimethylaminuria treated? There's currently no cure or approved drug to treat trimethylaminuria, but symptoms can be improved by making certain lifestyle changes and, if necessary, taking the medication outlined below. Diet You can reduce the odour by avoiding foods containing the chemicals trimethylamine, choline and trimethylamine N-oxide. This means avoiding: milk from wheat-fed cows eggs liver kidney peas beans peanuts soy products Brussels sprouts broccoli cabbage cauliflower seafood (fish and crustaceans), although freshwater fish can be eaten lecithin and lecithin-containing fish oil supplements However, if you're pregnant or planning a pregnancy, contact your dietitian or GP before restricting your diet. Medication Taking low doses of antibiotics can reduce the amount of bacteria in your gut and suppress the production of trimethylamine. However, to avoid antibiotic resistance, these should only be used now and again, or alternated every two weeks. Laxatives can speed up the passage of food through your bowel so less trimethylamine is produced in your gut. You may also be able to decrease the concentration of trimethylamine in your urine by taking supplements such as: 750 milligrams (mg) of charcoal twice daily for 10 days 60mg copper chlorophyllin three times a day for three weeks riboflavin (vitamin B2) supplements to enhance any FMO3 enzyme activity Always seek the advice of your doctor before trying any of the above medications and supplements. Other lifestyle measures It's a good idea to avoid anything that causes you to sweat excessively, such as intense exercise and stress. To help, try easy exercises and learn how to cope with stress. Use soap and shampoos with a pH between 5.5 and 6.5. These help to remove traces of trimethylamine from your skin and hair. Counselling Trimethylaminuria can be very upsetting, potentially affecting your personal life and career. Depression and social isolation are common. Counselling may help you cope with any depression and other psychological symptoms. For more information, visit our pages on how to get help for stress, anxiety and depression.  Genetic counselling may help you understand how you developed the condition and the risks of passing it on to any children you have. Information about you If you or your child has trimethylaminuria, your clinical team will pass information about you\/your child on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 14\/04\/2015 Next review due: 14\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 244 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 133  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Body odour Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) Halitosis (bad breath) External links Trimethylaminuria Support Group NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trisomy 13","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pataus-syndrome","content":"Patau's syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Patau's syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Patau's syndrome is a rare, serious genetic disorder caused by having an additional copy of chromosome 13 in some or all of the body's cells. It's also called trisomy 13. Each cell normally contains 23 pairs of chromosomes, which carry the genes you inherit from your parents.  But a baby with Patau's syndrome has three copies of chromosome 13, instead of two. This severely disrupts normal development and, in many cases, results in miscarriage, stillbirth, or the baby dying shortly after birth. Babies with Patau's syndrome grow slowly in the womb and have a low birth weight, along with a number of other serious medical problems. Patau's syndrome affects about 1 in every 5,000 births. The risk of having a baby with the syndrome increases with the mother's age. More than 9 out of 10 children (over 90%) born with Patau's syndrome die during the first year. About 5-10% of babies with less severe forms of the syndrome, such as partial or mosaic trisomy 13, live for more than a year. This topic covers the following areas: Symptoms and features Causes Screening Treatment and management Genetic testing Further information and support  Symptoms and features Babies with Patau's syndrome can have a wide range of health problems. Their growth in the womb is often restricted, resulting in a low birth weight, and 80% will be born with severe heart defects. The brain often doesn't divide into two halves. This is known as holoprosencephaly. When this happens it can affect facial features and cause defects, such as: cleft lip and palate  an abnormally small eye or eyes (microphthalmia) absence of one or both eyes (anophthalmia) reduced distance between the eyes (hypotelorism) problems with the development of the nasal passages Other abnormalities of the face and head include: smaller than normal head size (microcephaly) skin missing from the scalp (cutis aplasia) ear malformations and deafness raised, red birthmarks (capillary haemangiomas) Patau's syndrome can also cause other problems, such as: an abdominal wall defect where the abdomen doesn't develop fully in the womb, resulting in the intestines being outside the body, covered only by a membrane \u2013 this is known as an exomphalos or omphalocoele abnormal cysts in the kidneys an abnormally small penis in boys  an enlarged clitoris in girls There may also be abnormalities of the hands and feet, such as extra fingers or toes (polydactyly), and a rounded bottom to the feet, known as rocker-bottom feet. Causes of Patau's syndrome Patau's syndrome happens by chance and isn't caused by anything the parents have done. Most cases of the syndrome don't run in families (they're not inherited). They occur randomly during conception, when the sperm and egg combine and the foetus starts to develop. An error occurs when the cells divide, resulting in an additional copy \u2013 or part of a copy \u2013 of chromosome 13, which severely affects the baby's development in the womb. In many cases, the baby dies before reaching full term (miscarriage) or is dead at birth (stillbirth). In most cases of Patau's syndrome (75-90%), a baby has a whole extra copy of chromosome number 13 in their body's cells. This is sometimes known as trisomy 13 or simple trisomy 13. In 5-10% of cases of Patau's syndrome, genetic material is rearranged between chromosome 13 and another chromosome. This is called a chromosomal translocation. Patau's syndrome that arises because of this can be inherited. Genetic Alliance UK has more information about chromosome disorders. In a further 5% of cases, only some cells have the extra copy of chromosome 13. This is known as trisomy 13 mosaicism. Occasionally, only part of one chromosome 13 is extra (partial trisomy 13). The symptoms and features of both mosaicism and partial trisomy tend to be less severe than in simple trisomy 13, resulting in more babies living longer. Screening for Patau's syndrome You'll be offered a screening test for Patau's syndrome \u2013 as well as Down's syndrome (trisomy 21) and Edwards' syndrome (trisomy 18) \u2013 from 10-14 weeks of pregnancy. The test assesses your chances of having a baby with these syndromes. The screening test offered at 10-14 weeks of pregnancy is called the combined test because it involves a blood test and an ultrasound scan. If the screening tests show that you have a higher risk of having a baby with Patau's syndrome, you'll be offered a diagnostic test to find out for certain whether your baby has the syndrome. This test will check your baby's chromosomes in a sample of cells taken from him or her. Two techniques can be used to obtain the cell sample \u2013 amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS). These are invasive tests to remove a sample of tissue or fluid so it can be tested for the presence of the extra copy of chromosome 13. A newer test has recently been developed where a sample of blood from the mother is taken so that the baby's DNA found within it can be tested. This is known as non-invasive prenatal testing, and is only available privately. If you're not able to have the combined screening test, you'll be offered a scan that looks for physical abnormalities, including those found in Patau's syndrome. This is sometimes called the mid-pregnancy scan and is carried out when you're between 18 and 21 weeks pregnant. Read more about screening tests in pregnancy. Treating and managing Patau's syndrome There's no specific treatment for Patau's syndrome. As a result of the severe health problems a newborn baby with the syndrome will have, doctors usually focus on minimising discomfort and ensuring the baby is able to feed. For the small number of babies with Patau's syndrome who survive beyond the first few days of life, their care will depend on their specific symptoms and needs. If your baby is diagnosed with Patau's syndrome, either before birth or shortly afterwards, you'll be offered counselling and support. Genetic testing for parents Both parents will need to have their chromosomes analysed if their baby is affected by Patau's syndrome caused by a chromosomal translocation. Genetic testing is carried out to help parents plan for future pregnancies, rather than as part of the decision making process for the current pregnancy. The test results will allow a more accurate assessment to be made of the likelihood of the syndrome affecting future pregnancies. Other family members may also be affected and should be tested. Read more about genetic testing and counselling. Further information and support The organisations listed below are useful further sources of information about Patau's syndrome and can also provide advice and support: Contact a Family  Genetic Alliance UK  Support Organisation for Trisomy 18 and 13 (SOFT UK)    Page last reviewed: 31\/05\/2016 Next review due: 31\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 0 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Amniocentesis Chorionic villus sampling Coping with stillbirth Genetics Screening in pregnancy External links Babyloss Contact a Family Miscarriage Association Sands: stillbirth and neonatal death charity Support for Trisomy 13\/18 (SOFT UK) Genetics Find out how you inherit your physical and behavioural characteristics, plus learn about testing for genetic conditions Down's syndrome Down's syndrome is a genetic condition that typically causes some level of learning disability and a range of physical features Edwards' syndrome Edwards' syndrome, also known as trisomy 18, is a serious genetic condition that occurs in babies born with three copies of chromosome 18 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trisomy 18","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/edwards-syndrome","content":"Edwards' syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Edwards' syndrome (trisomy 18)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview edwards-syndrome Clinical trials Edwards' syndrome Introduction  Edwards' syndrome, also known as trisomy 18, is a serious genetic condition caused by an additional copy of chromosome 18 in some or all of the cells in the body. Each cell normally contains 23 pairs of chromosomes, which carry the genes you inherit from your parents, but a baby with Edwards' syndrome has three copies of chromosome number 18, instead of two. This disrupts the baby's normal development and, in many cases, causes them to be miscarried or stillborn. Babies with Edwards' syndrome will have grown slowly in the womb and will have a low birthweight, along with a number of other serious medical problems. Of those that survive to birth, around half will die within two weeks and only around one in every five will live at least three months. Around one in every 12 babies born with Edwards' syndrome survive beyond one year, and they will live with severe physical and mental disabilities. Some children do survive to early adulthood, but this is very rare. Edwards' syndrome affects around one in 3,000 to 6,000 live births. What are the features and symptoms? Babies with Edwards' syndrome can have a wide range of different problems. Physical signs of Edwards' syndrome include: a small, abnormally shaped head a small jaw and mouth long fingers that overlap, with underdeveloped thumbs and clenched fists low-set ears smooth \"rocker bottom\" feet (with a rounded base)  a cleft lip and palate (a gap or split in the upper lip and\/or the roof of the mouth) an exomphalos (where the intestines are held in a sac outside the tummy) Babies with Edwards' syndrome also typically have: heart and kidney problems feeding problems \u2013 leading to poor growth breathing problems hernias in the wall of their stomach (where internal tissues push through a weakness in the muscle wall) bone abnormalities \u2013 such as a curved spine frequent infections of the lungs and urinary system a severe learning disability How does Edwards' syndrome happen? Edwards' syndrome is rarely inherited and the condition is not caused by anything the parents have done. The development of three copies of chromosome 18 usually happens randomly during the formation of eggs and sperm. There is an error in the division of cells, and the extra chromosome is either in the egg cell produced by the mother or in the sperm cell produced by the father. As this happens randomly, it's extremely unlikely for parents to have more than one pregnancy affected by Edwards' syndrome. The chance of having a baby with Edwards' syndrome increases with the mother's age. Types of Edwards' syndrome There are two main types of Edwards' syndrome. Full form Approximately 94% of babies with Edwards' syndrome will have the full form, where every cell in their body has three copies of chromosome 18, instead of two. Most babies with this form will die before infancy. Mosaic trisomy 18 About 5% of babies with Edwards' syndrome will have the extra copy of chromosome 18 in only some of their body cells. This less severe form of the disease is known as mosaic trisomy 18. The severity of mosaic trisomy 18 depends on the type and number of cells that have the extra chromosome. Some babies may only be mildly affected, while some can be severely disabled. Around seven in every 10 babies born with mosaic trisomy will live for at least a year and, in rare cases, babies with the condition may survive into early adulthood. Testing for Edwards' syndrome during pregnancy Pregnant women are offered screening for Edwards\u2019 syndrome between 10 and 14 weeks of pregnancy to assess the chances of their baby having the condition. The screening test, known as the combined test, comprises a blood test plus a nuchal translucency ultrasound scan (nuchal translucency is a collection of fluid at the back of the baby's neck). This test also screens for Down\u2019s syndrome and Patau\u2019s syndrome. Read more about screening for Edwards\u2019 syndrome at 10-14 weeks. Later in pregnancy, usually when you are 18 to 21 weeks pregnant, you will also be offered a scan that looks for physical abnormalities and 11 rare conditions, including Edwards\u2019 syndrome. Read more about the mid-pregnancy scan. If the screening tests show that you have a higher risk of having a baby with Edwards' syndrome, you will be offered diagnostic tests to find out for certain if your baby has the condition. The diagnosis can be confirmed by carrying out chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis. These are invasive tests performed during pregnancy to remove a sample of tissue or fluid so it can be tested for the presence of the extra copy of chromosome 18. A newer test has also been developed that can be performed by taking a sample of blood from the mother and testing the baby\u2019s DNA that is found within it. This is known as \"non-invasive prenatal diagnosis\" and is only available privately. Read more about screening tests in pregnancy. Is there any treatment? There is no cure for Edwards' syndrome and the symptoms can be very difficult to manage. You are likely to need help from a wide range of health professionals. Treatment will focus on immediately life-threatening issues, such as infections and heart problems. Your child may also need to be fed through a feeding tube, if feeding is a problem. If limb abnormalities affect your child's movements as they get older, they may benefit from supportive treatment, such as physiotherapy and occupational therapy. Depending on your child's specific problems, they may need specialist care in hospital or a hospice, or you may be able to look after them at home with appropriate support. Information about your child If your child has Edwards' syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Advice for carers Caring for a child with Edwards' syndrome is mentally and physically challenging. Most carers will need social and psychological support. The NHS Choices Care and support site provides lots of advice on how you can take time to look after yourself, including: keeping fit and healthy  getting a break from caring  getting legal support and advocacy  taking care of your wellbeing You can also visit the SOFT UK website for support and more information on Edwards' syndrome, and to contact other families affected by the condition. Page last reviewed: 25\/09\/2014 Next review due: 25\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 349 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 242  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Screening in pregnancy Genetics Caring for a disabled child Miscarriage Stillbirth External links SOFT UK (Support Organisation for Trisomy 13\/18) Screening in pregnancy Screening for abnormalities in pregnancy, including inherited disorders such as sickle cell Bereavement in pregnancy Find out how you can cope with bereavement, emotionally and financially, when you're pregnant NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trisomy 21","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Downs-syndrome","content":"Down's syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Down's syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Downs-syndrome Real stories Downs-syndrome Clinical trials Down's syndrome Downs-syndrome Characteristics Downs-syndrome Causes Downs-syndrome Diagnosis Downs-syndrome Living with Downs-syndrome Complications Introduction  Down's syndrome, also known as Down syndrome, is a genetic condition that typically causes some level of learning disability and characteristic physical features. Around 775 babies are born with the condition each year in England and Wales. Many babies born with Down's syndrome are diagnosed with the condition after birth and are likely to have: reduced muscle tone leading to floppiness (hypotonia) eyes that slant upwards and outwards a small mouth with a protruding tongue a flat back of the head below-average weight and length at birth Although children with Down's syndrome share some common physical characteristics, they do not all look the same. A child with Down's syndrome will look more like their mother, father or other family members than other children with the syndrome. People with Down's syndrome also vary in personality and ability. Everyone born with Down's syndrome will have a degree of learning disability, but the level of disability will be different for each individual. Read more about the characteristics of Down's syndrome. Screening for Down's syndrome In some cases, babies with the condition are identified before birth as a result of screening for Down's syndrome. Screening tests can't tell you for definite if your baby has Down's syndrome, but they can tell you how likely it is. If screening suggests there is a chance your baby does have Down's syndrome, further tests can be carried out during pregnancy to confirm it. If testing indicates your child will be born with Down's syndrome, you should be offered genetic counselling to allow you and your partner to discuss the impact of the diagnosis. You may also be offered an appointment to meet a doctor or other health professional who works with children with Down's syndrome, who can also tell you more about the condition and answer any questions you may have. Read more about diagnosing Down's syndrome. What causes Down's syndrome? Down's syndrome is caused by the presence of an extra copy of chromosome 21 in a baby's cells. In the vast majority of cases, this isn't inherited and is simply the result of a one-off genetic mistake in the sperm or egg. There is a small chance of having a child with Down's syndrome with every pregnancy, but the likelihood increases with the age of the mother. For example, a woman who is 20 has about a 1 in 1,500 chance of having a baby with the condition, while a woman who is 40 has a 1 in 100 chance. There is no evidence that anything done before or during pregnancy increases or decreases the chance of having a child with Down's syndrome. Read more about the causes of Down's syndrome. Life with Down's syndrome Although there is no \"cure\" for Down's syndrome, there are ways to help children with the condition develop into healthy and fulfilled individuals who are able to achieve the level of independence right for them. This includes: access to good healthcare, including a range of different specialists early intervention programmes to provide support for children and parents good parenting skills and an ordinary family life education and support groups to provide information and help for parents, friends and families Improved education and support has led to more opportunities for people with Down's syndrome. These include being able to leave home, form new relationships, gain employment and lead largely independent lives. However, it is important to remember each child is different and it is not possible to predict how individuals will develop. Read more about living with Down's syndrome. Care and support If you have Down's syndrome or care for someone who has Down's syndrome, it may be useful to read your guide to care and support. This guide is for people with care and support needs, as well as their carers and relatives. It includes information and advice on: practical support for carers  parenting children with complex needs  tips on caring for a disabled child  children and young people's services  Associated health conditions There are a number of disorders that are more common in people with Down's syndrome. These include: hearing and vision problems heart disorders, such as congenital heart disease thyroid problems, such as an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) recurrent infections, such as pneumonia Your child may be checked by a paediatrician more often than other children to pick up developing problems as early as possible. If you have any concerns about your child's health, discuss them with your GP, health visitor or paediatrician. Read more about the complications of Down's syndrome. Down's Syndrome Association If you would like more information about Down's syndrome, you can visit the Down's Syndrome Association or call their helpline on 0333 121 2300. Page last reviewed: 14\/01\/2015 Next review due: 14\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 476 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 296  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Down's syndrome: Emily's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Emily was born with Down's syndrome. Watch her mum talk about the health issues they faced when she was little, and Emily's life as a young adult. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Learning disabilities Living with disability Screening in pregnancy Special needs in children External links Down's Heart Group Down's Syndrome Association Down Syndrome Medical Interest Group Down Syndrome Research Foundation Special needs in children If your child has a health condition or disability, they may need specialised healthcare and help at school Tips for caring for a disabled child Caring for a disabled child can make feeding, toilet training and getting them to sleep more challenging, but help is at hand Caring for children with complex needs A child might have complex needs from birth, or following an illness or injury. Find out what support is available NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Trophoblastic disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Molar-pregnancy","content":"Molar pregnancy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Molar pregnancy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview molar-pregnancy Clinical trials Molar pregnancy Introduction  A molar pregnancy is an unsuccessful pregnancy, where the placenta and foetus do not form properly, and a baby does not develop. What happens In a normal pregnancy, the placenta provides nourishment to the developing baby and removes waste products. The placenta is made up of millions of cells known as trophoblastic cells. In a molar pregnancy, these cells behave abnormally as soon as the egg has been fertilised by the sperm. This results in a mass of abnormal cells that can grow as fluid-filled sacs (cysts) with the appearance of white grapes. These cells grow rapidly within the womb, instead of developing into a baby. The abnormal cells are referred to as a \"mole\", which is from the Latin for mass or lump. Molar pregnancy is also called a hydatidiform mole and is a pre-cancerous form of gestational trophoblastic disease.  Molar pregnancies are caused by an imbalance in genetic material (chromosomes) in the pregnancy. This usually occurs when an egg that contains no genetic information is fertilised by a sperm (a complete molar pregnancy), or when a normal egg is fertilised by two sperm (a partial molar pregnancy). In complete molar pregnancy, the embryo does not develop at all. In a partial molar pregnancy, a foetus can develop but never results in a viable baby, due to the imbalance between the male and female chromosomes. A molar pregnancy is not caused by anything that you or your partner does or does not do. How common is molar pregnancy? Molar pregnancies are rare. About one to three in every 1,000 pregnancies turn out to be molar.  Increased risk Factors that increase the risk of molar pregnancies are thought to include: Age \u2013 complete molar pregnancies are more common in teenage women and women over 45 years old. Age has little or no effect on the risk of partial molar pregnancy.  Previous molar pregnancy \u2013 if you have had one molar pregnancy before, your chance of having another one is around one to two in 100, compared with one in 600 for women who haven't had a molar pregnancy. If you have had two or more molar pregnancies, your risk of having another is around 15-20 in 100.  Ethnicity \u2013 molar pregnancies are most common in Asian countries, such as Taiwan, the Philippines and Japan, and also among Native Americans. However, in recent years, the differences in the incidence of molar pregnancy between these communities and the general population have become less marked.  Types of molar pregnancy There are two main types of molar pregnancy, depending on the balance of chromosomes in the egg. These are: complete moles \u2013 when no normal placental tissue forms and no foetus develops; instead, a mass of abnormal cells grow partial moles \u2013 when some abnormal placental tissue forms along with some abnormal foetus; the foetus cannot develop into a baby In very rare cases, a twin pregnancy can include a normal foetus and a mole. Symptoms and diagnosis There are often no signs that a pregnancy is a molar pregnancy. In most cases, the problem is first spotted during an ultrasound scan, which may be the first pregnancy scan at 10-14 weeks. If there are symptoms, they usually appear between weeks 4 and 12 of pregnancy. The most common symptom is bleeding or losing brown-red fluid from the vagina. Sickness and vomiting may be more severe than in a normal pregnancy. Bleeding usually requires an ultrasound scan. If this scan is abnormal, an evacuation of the uterus is performed. This is when the molar pregnancy is removed, usually with a surgical procedure called suction evacuation. The surgery involves opening your cervix (neck of the womb) with a small tube known as a dilator, and removing any remaining tissue with a suction device. Tissue from the pregnancy is then sent to a laboratory to confirm whether it is a molar pregnancy. If a woman has a miscarriage or a termination for other reasons, tissue may be sent to a laboratory for analysis. This may confirm that the pregnancy was molar, even if a molar pregnancy wasn't suspected. Treatment A molar pregnancy usually needs to be removed surgically. This is done with a suction evacuation, under the care of a gynaecologist. In some cases, molar pregnancy can be treated with the removal of the womb (hysterectomy), but this is usually only if you no longer wish to have children. Almost all cases of molar pregnancy are successfully cured. For further information, go to the Charing Cross Hospital Trophoblast Disease Service or the The Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre websites. After treatment Following the mole's removal, some cells will be left in the womb. These cells usually die off over time in around 90% of women. To check the cells have died, all women who have had a molar pregnancy in the UK undergo monitoring of the hormone hCG (human chorionic gonadotrophin) via the National Trophoblastic Screening Centre's surveillance programme. hCG is the pregnancy test hormone produced by a normal placenta, but also by the mole cells, and is the hormone detected in a pregnancy test. It can also be detected in blood and urine tests. Women on the surveillance programme send in blood or urine samples every two weeks. This is so they can be monitored for signs of persistent trophoblastic disease, which is a risk after all molar pregnancies (see below). Persistent trophoblastic disease needs further treatment with chemotherapy. For further information, go to the Charing Cross Hospital Trophoblast Disease Service or the Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre websites. Hormone monitoring will identify the small number of women who develop a persistent or invasive mole (see below). In these cases, levels of hCG will stay steady or rise, rather than fall. Complications In some cases, the molar disease left after the evacuation of the uterus regrows rather than dies out, and is then known as a persistent disease. This is one of the malignant forms of gestational trophoblastic disease and includes invasive mole and choriocarcinoma. A further suction evacuation may help in a few patients, but chemotherapy is usually necessary to cure the problem. The risk of needing further treatment is: 1 in 10 after a complete molar pregnancy 1 in 100 after a partial molar pregnancy Invasive molar pregnancy is usually treated with chemotherapy in the form of methotrexate and folinic acid. Methotrexate is given as an intramuscular (into the muscle) injection, and folinic acid as a tablet. The injection and tablet are given on alternate days for eight days, followed by a six-day rest period. The eight-day cycle of injections and tablets then begins again. This continues until six weeks after the hCG levels return to normal.  Between one and three in every 100 women may see the condition flare up again, so all women are put into a follow-up programme to monitor their hCG after treatment. Persistent trophoblastic disease is different from normal types of cancer, and the cure rate for women developing it after a molar pregnancy is about 100%. This means that around 100 in 100 women who develop persistent trophoblastic disease after molar pregnancy are cured. There are two treatment centres on in Sheffield and one in London. For further information, go to the Charing Cross Hospital Trophoblast Disease Service or the Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre website. Getting pregnant again It is recommended that you do not get pregnant again until you complete your hCG hormone monitoring, following a molar pregnancy. This normally happens within a few months, but in some cases can take up to a year. Your medical team will discuss this with you. Most women who have chemotherapy treatment for persistent trophoblastic disease will have started their periods again six months after treatment. The Charing Cross Hospital trophoblastic disease treatment team suggest that you do not try to get pregnant again for 12 months after finishing chemotherapy. You can use any method of contraception, including the pill. For an online patient support group with a chat room visit www.mymolarpregnancy.com. Grape-like cysts from a hydatidiform mole  Emotional effects While physical recovery is often relatively quick, it can take longer to recover emotionally from a molar pregnancy. Not only does molar pregnancy involve the loss of a foetus, it also carries the slight risk of a cancerous growth. This can create an enormous emotional strain. Communicating your feelings with your partner, a doctor, a counsellor, or someone else who has gone through a similar experience can be beneficial. There are support groups and forums that can help people handle the stress of a molar pregnancy, such as the Molar Pregnancy Support Group and the Hydatidiform Mole UK Information and Support Service. Read more about dealing with stress, anxiety and depression. Page last reviewed: 09\/10\/2014 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 151 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Stress, anxiety and depression Dilatation and curettage (D&C) External links Molar pregnancy support group Hydatidiform Mole UK Information and Support Service Cancer Research UK: molar pregnancy Coping with bereavement A bereavement counsellor explains what bereavement is, how to cope and where to go for help and support NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tuberculosis (TB)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tuberculosis","content":"Tuberculosis (TB) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tuberculosis (TB)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tuberculosis Clinical trials Tuberculosis Tuberculosis Symptoms Tuberculosis Causes Tuberculosis Diagnosis Tuberculosis Treatment Introduction  Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial infection spread through inhaling tiny droplets from the coughs or sneezes of an infected person. It is a serious condition, but can be cured with proper treatment. TB mainly affects the lungs. However, it can affect any part of the body, including the glands, bones and nervous system. Symptoms of TB Typical symptoms of TB include: a persistent cough that lasts more than three weeks and usually brings up phlegm, which may be bloody weight loss night sweats high temperature (fever) tiredness and fatigue loss of appetite new swellings that haven't gone away after a few weeks You should see a GP if you have a cough that lasts more than three weeks or if you cough up blood. Read more about the symptoms of TB and diagnosing TB. What causes TB? TB is caused by a bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis. TB that affects the lungs is the most contagious type, but it usually only spreads after prolonged exposure to someone with the illness. For example, it often spreads within a family who live in the same house. In most healthy people, the immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness) kills the bacteria, and you have no symptoms. Sometimes the immune system cannot kill the bacteria, but manages to prevent it spreading in the body. This means you will not have any symptoms, but the bacteria will remain in your body. This is known as \"latent TB\".  If the immune system fails to kill or contain the infection, it can spread within the lungs or other parts of the body and symptoms will develop within a few weeks or months. This is known as \"active TB\". Latent TB could develop into an active TB infection at a later date, particularly if your immune system becomes weakened. Read more about the causes of TB. Who is affected? Before antibiotics were introduced, TB was a major health problem in the UK. Nowadays, the condition is much less common. However, in the last 20 years, TB cases have gradually increased, particularly among ethnic minority communities who are originally from countries where TB is more common. In 2014, more than 6,500 cases of TB were reported in England. Of these, around 4,700 affected people who were born outside the UK. It's estimated that around one-third of the world's population is infected with latent TB. Of these, up to 10% will become active at some point. How TB is treated With treatment, TB can usually be cured. Most people will need a course of antibiotics, usually for six months. Several different antibiotics are used. This is because some forms of TB are resistant to certain antibiotics. If you are infected with a drug-resistant form of TB, treatment with six or more different medications may be needed. If you are in close contact with someone who has TB, tests may be carried out to see if you are also infected. These can include a chest X-ray, blood tests, and a skin test called the Mantoux test. Read more about treating TB. Tuberculosis vaccination The BCG vaccine can provide effective protection against TB in up to 8 out of 10 people who are given it. Currently, BCG vaccinations are only recommended for groups of people who are at a higher risk of developing TB. This includes children living in areas with high rates of TB, or those who have close family members from countries with high TB rates, and people under the age of 16 who are going to live and work with local people in an area with high rates of TB for more than three months. It's also recommended that some people, such as healthcare workers, are vaccinated because of the increased risk of contracting TB while working. Countries with high TB rates Parts of the world that have high rates of TB include: Africa \u2013 particularly sub-Saharan Africa (all the African countries south of the Sahara desert) and west Africa southeast Asia \u2013 including India, Pakistan, Indonesia and Bangladesh Russia China South America the western Pacific region (to the west of the Pacific Ocean) \u2013 including Vietnam and Cambodia For a world map showing countries with high rates of TB, see the World Health Organization (WHO) website. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/12\/2014 Next review due: 03\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1129 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 526  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 236  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 253  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chest infection Travel health Vaccinations Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? External links Public Health England (PHE): Got TB? Read this (PDF, 942kb) PHE: Information about TB for people in prisons (PDF, 679kb) PHE: Pregnancy and tuberculosis (PDF, 150kb) PHE: Substance misuse and TB - for those affected (PDF, 315kb) PHE: Substance misuse and TB - for families affected (PDF, 275kb) PHE: Tests conducted in TB clinics (PDF, 49kb) Fit for Travel: tuberculosis BCG tuberculosis (TB) vaccine How the BCG vaccine provides protection against tuberculosis (TB) and who needs it Cough Find out about the main causes of a cough, when to seek medical advice, and what treatments are available NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tuberous sclerosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Tuberous-sclerosis","content":"Tuberous sclerosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tuberous sclerosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Tuberous-sclerosis Clinical trials Tuberous sclerosis Tuberous-sclerosis Features Tuberous-sclerosis Diagnosis Tuberous-sclerosis Treatment Introduction  Tuberous sclerosis, also known as tuberous sclerosis complex, is a rare genetic condition that causes mainly non-cancerous (benign) tumours to develop in different parts of the body. The tumours most often affect the brain, skin, kidneys, heart, eyes and lungs. Tuberous sclerosis is present from birth, although it may not cause obvious problems immediately. It's estimated that around 1 in every 6,000 babies are born with the condition. What problems can tuberous sclerosis cause? The tumours caused by tuberous sclerosis can result in a range of associated health problems, including: epilepsy \u2013 a condition that causes seizures (fits) learning disabilities behavioural problems \u2013 such as hyperactivity or an autistic spectrum disorder skin abnormalities \u2013 such as patches of light-coloured or thickened skin, or red acne-like spots on the face the kidneys not working properly breathing difficulties a build-up of fluid on the brain (hydrocephalus) These problems can range from mild to severe, and it's possible to have only a few of these problems or a wide range of problems. Members of the same family may be affected very differently by tuberous sclerosis.  Read more about the features of tuberous sclerosis and diagnosing tuberous sclerosis. What causes tuberous sclerosis? Tuberous sclerosis is caused by mutations (changes) in either the TSC1 or TSC2 gene. These genes are involved in regulating cell growth, and the mutations lead to uncontrolled growth and multiple tumours throughout the body. In around three in every four cases, the genetic fault occurs for no apparent reason in people without any other affected family members. In the remaining one in four cases, the fault is passed on to a child by their parents. Only one parent needs to carry the faulty gene to pass it on, and a parent who has one of the faulty genes has a one in two chance of passing it on to each child they have. The parent carrying the faulty gene will also have tuberous sclerosis, although sometimes it may be so mild that they don't realise it. How tuberous sclerosis is treated There is currently no cure for tuberous sclerosis, but there is a range of treatments for many of problems caused by the condition. For example: epilepsy may be controlled with medication, or in some cases surgery extra educational support can help children with learning disabilities challenging behaviour and psychiatric problems (such as autism, anxiety or depression) can be treated with behavioural interventions and medication brain tumours can be surgically removed or shrunk with medication the facial rash can be treated with laser therapy and\/or medication applied to the skin medication can control symptoms caused by reduced kidney function and can help to shrink kidney tumours lung problems can be treated with medication Research has found that mTOR inhibitors, which interrupt the chemical reactions needed for tumours to grow, may be a very useful treatment in the future. People with tuberous sclerosis will also need to have regular tests to monitor the function of the organs that can be affected by the condition. Read more about treating tuberous sclerosis. Outlook The outlook for people with tuberous sclerosis can vary considerably. Some people have few symptoms and the condition has little impact on their life, while others \u2013 particularly those with a faulty TSC2 gene or obvious problems from an early age \u2013 can have severe and potentially life-threatening problems that require lifelong care. Many people will have a normal lifespan, although a number of life-threatening complications can develop. These include a loss of kidney function, a serious lung infection called bronchopneumonia and a severe type of epileptic seizure called status epilepticus. People with tuberous sclerosis may also be at an increased risk of developing certain types of cancer, such as kidney cancer, but this is rare. Tuberous Sclerosis Association (TSA) The TSA provides information, advice and support to individuals and families affected by tuberous sclerosis. You can visit the TSA website for more information and to access their online community. You can also contact the organisation's specialist advisers in your area. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/05\/2015 Next review due: 27\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 66 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Epilepsy Hydrocephalus Learning disabilities Polycystic kidneys External links Tuberous Sclerosis Association Epilepsy Epilepsy is a condition that affects the brain and causes repeated seizures or fits. It affects over 500,000 people in the UK Genetics Find out how you inherit your physical and behavioural characteristics, plus learn about testing for genetic conditions NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tummy ache","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/stomach-ache-abdominal-pain","content":"Stomach ache and abdominal pain - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes please Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stomach ache and abdominal pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Stomach ache and abdominal pain   A stomach ache is a term often used to refer to cramps or a dull ache in the tummy (abdomen). It's usually short-lived and is often not serious. Severe abdominal pain is a greater cause for concern. If it starts suddenly and unexpectedly, it should be regarded as a medical emergency, especially if the pain is concentrated in a particular area. Call your GP as soon as possible or go to your nearest hospital accident and emergency (A&E) department if this is the case. If you feel pain in the area around your ribs, read about chest pain for information and advice. Stomach cramps with bloating Stomach cramps with bloating are often caused by trapped wind. This is a very common problem that can be embarrassing, but is easily dealt with. Your chemist will be able to recommend a product such as buscopan or mebeverine, which can be bought over the counter to treat the problem. Sudden stomach cramps with diarrhoea If your stomach cramps have started recently and you also have diarrhoea, the cause may be a tummy bug (gastroenteritis). This means you have a viral or bacterial infection of the stomach and bowel, which should get better without treatment after a few days. Gastroenteritis may be caused by coming into close contact with someone who's infected, or by eating contaminated food (food poisoning). If you have repeated bouts of stomach cramps and diarrhoea, you may have a long-term condition, such as irritable bowel syndrome. Sudden severe abdominal pain If you have sudden agonising pain in a particular area of your tummy, call your GP immediately or go to your nearest A&E department. It may be a sign of a serious problem that could rapidly get worse without treatment. Serious causes of sudden severe abdominal pain include: appendicitis \u2013 the swelling of the appendix (a finger-like pouch connected to the large intestine), which causes agonising pain in the lower right-hand side of your abdomen, and means your appendix will need to be removed a bleeding or perforated stomach ulcer \u2013 a bleeding, open sore in the lining of your stomach or duodenum (the first part of the small intestine) acute cholecystitis \u2013 inflammation of the gallbladder, which is often caused by gallstones; in many cases, your gallbladder will need to be removed kidney stones \u2013 small stones may be passed out in your urine, but larger stones may block the kidney tubes, and you'll need to go to hospital to have them broken up diverticulitis \u2013 inflammation of the small pouches in the bowel that sometimes requires treatment with antibiotics in hospital If your GP suspects you have one of these conditions, they may refer you to hospital immediately. Sudden and severe pain in your abdomen can also sometimes be caused by an infection of the stomach and bowel (gastroenteritis). It may also be caused by a pulled muscle in your abdomen or by an injury. Long-term or recurring abdominal pain See your GP if you or your child have persistent or repeated abdominal pain. The cause is often not serious and can be managed. Possible causes in adults include: irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) \u2013 a common condition that causes bouts of stomach cramps, bloating, diarrhoea or constipation; the pain is often relieved when you go to the toilet inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) \u2013 long-term conditions that involve inflammation of the gut, including Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis a urinary tract infection that keeps returning \u2013 in these cases, you will usually also experience a burning sensation when you urinate constipation  period pain \u2013 painful muscle cramps in women that are linked to the menstrual cycle other stomach-related problems \u2013 such as a stomach ulcer, heartburn and acid reflux, or gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining) Possible causes in children include: constipation a urinary tract infection that keeps returning heartburn and acid reflux  abdominal migraines \u2013 recurrent episodes of abdominal pain with no identifiable cause Page last reviewed: 15\/12\/2014 Next review due: 15\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2347 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 660  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 500  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 337  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 253  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 597  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Digestive health Gastroenteritis Indigestion Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) Beat the bloat Tips for getting rid of bloating, including cutting out 'windy' foods and fizzy drinks, plus regular exercise Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Tummy tuck","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/tummy-tuck.aspx","content":"Tummy tuck Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Tummy tuck (abdominoplasty) A tummy tuck, or 'abdominoplasty', is cosmetic surgery to improve the shape of the tummy area (abdomen). It can involve removing fat and excess loose skin and tightening the abdominal muscles. The aim is to remove excess tummy skin that can't be removed through exercise - for example, after losing a lot of weight or after pregnancy. But it\u2019s not a quick fix for losing weight. An abdominoplasty is regarded cosmetic surgery, so not normally available on the NHS. If you're thinking of going ahead, make sure you're aware of the cost and the fact that it's major surgery, with risks to consider. Take time to reflect on your decision. It may help to read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\". You can read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems   Who shouldn't have it?  More information  How much does it cost? It costs about £4,500 to £6,000 to have an abdominoplasty in the UK, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may not be included in the price. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a tummy tuck. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out your surgery. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? There are two types of tummy tuck, and both are usually carried out under a general anaesthetic. A partial tummy tuck involves: making a large incision (cut) across the lower tummy separating the skin from the abdominal wall below the tummy button removing excess fat cutting away excess skin pulling together the remaining skin and stitching it in place A full tummy tuck involves: making a large incision across the lower tummy, from hip to hip, just above the pubic area making a second incision to free the belly button from the tissue that surrounds it separating the skin from the abdominal wall realigning the abdominal muscles removing excess fat and skin cutting a new hole for the belly button, and stitching this back in place pulling together the remaining skin and stitching it in place The operation can take between two and five hours. Most people need to stay in hospital for a few nights. A tummy tuck may be quite painful, although pain relief would be provided. You would leave hospital with dressings and a pressure garment (corset) on your tummy, or tummy control pants. Someone would need to drive you home and stay with you for the following 24 hours. Recovery You would need to take about four to six weeks off work and exercise. You wouldn't be able to drive for a few weeks after the operation (your surgeon and insurance company would advise about this). It takes about six weeks to fully recover, and it may be several weeks before you see the full effects of the tummy tuck. You\u2019d need to wear a special type of corset or tummy control pants to encourage your skin to heal properly and reduce any swelling. Generally, you'd need to take it easy for a few weeks and keep your knees bent while in bed, to avoid putting strain on your stitches. After a week or two: A wound check would be carried out At six weeks: Your corset should be able to come off and you'd usually be able to return to most of your normal activities. Side effects to expect You would be left with a scar running across your lower tummy and, if you had a full abdominoplasty, a scar around your belly button. It\u2019s also common after a tummy tuck to: find it difficult to stand up straight \u2013 it will feel like your tummy is being pulled (this will improve over time) have pain and bruises feel numbness in your tummy for a few months to years  have a temporary fluid-filled swelling above the scar have red, raised scars in the first six weeks \u2013 which eventually fade to white What could go wrong A tummy tuck can occasionally result in: thick, obvious scars developing bulges under the skin 'dog ears' (extra skin) at the edges of the scar wounds failing to heal a collection of fluid in the area that was operated on a collection of blood underneath the skin (haematoma) numbness or pain in the tummy or down the leg tummy cramps or pain breathing problems Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic (very rare) The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you have a tummy tuck and are not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with the surgeon who treated you. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). Who shouldn't have it? A tummy tuck is not a procedure for someone who is overweight. If you're overweight, you can read our advice on how to lose weight safely and effectively. If you're not overweight but would like to tone up a flabby tummy, you may be interested in our 10-minute home toning workout and 10-minute abs workout. More information BAAPS: abdominal reduction BAPRAS: tummy tucks  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 5 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: Liposuction  BAAPS: abdominal reduction BAPRAS: tummy tucks News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation  How do I choose a surgeon? Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Turner syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Turners-syndrome","content":"Turner syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Turner syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Turners-syndrome Clinical trials Turner syndrome Turners-syndrome Symptoms Turners-syndrome Causes Turners-syndrome Diagnosis Turners-syndrome Treatment Introduction  Turner syndrome is a genetic disorder that affects about 1 in every 2,000 baby girls and only affects females. A girl with Turner syndrome only has one normal X sex chromosome, rather than the usual two (XX). This chromosome variation happens randomly when the baby is conceived in the womb. It is not linked to the mother's age. Read more about the genetic cause of Turner syndrome.  Characteristics of Turner syndrome Females with Turner syndrome often have a wide range of symptoms and some distinctive characteristics. Almost all girls with Turner syndrome: are shorter than average have underdeveloped ovaries (female reproductive organs), resulting in a lack of monthly periods and infertility As height and sexual development are the two main characteristics, Turner syndrome may not be diagnosed until a girl fails to show sexual development associated with puberty, usually between the ages of 8 and 14 years. Other characteristics of Turner syndrome can vary significantly between individuals. Read more about the symptoms of Turner syndrome and how Turner syndrome is diagnosed. Treating Turner syndrome There is no cure for Turner syndrome, but many of the associated symptoms can be treated. Girls and women with Turner syndrome will need to have regular health checks of their heart, kidneys and reproductive system throughout their lives. However, it is usually possible to lead a relatively normal and healthy life. Life expectancy is slightly reduced, but it can be improved with regular health checks to identify and treat potential problems at an early stage. Read more about treating Turner syndrome. Information about you If you or your daughter has Turner syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about you\/your daughter on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 27\/05\/2015 Next review due: 27\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 122 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Amniocentesis Chorionic villus sampling Genetics Hypothyroidism Lymphoedema Puberty Restricted growth External links British Society for Genetic Medicine Genetic Alliance UK Turner Syndrome Support Society Genetics Find out how you inherit your physical and behavioural characteristics, plus learn about testing for genetic conditions Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"TURP","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Resectionoftheprostate","content":"Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Transurethral resection of the prostate resectionoftheprostate How it's performed resectionoftheprostate Recovery resectionoftheprostate Risks resectionoftheprostate Alternatives Introduction  A transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) is a surgical procedure that involves cutting away a section of the prostate. The prostate is a small gland in the pelvis only found in men. It's located between the penis and bladder, and surrounds the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the penis). If the prostate becomes enlarged, it can place pressure on the bladder and urethra. This can cause symptoms that affect urination. Why TURP is carried out TURP is often recommended when prostate enlargement (benign prostatic hyperplasia) causes troublesome symptoms and fails to respond to treatment with medication. Symptoms that may improve after TURP include: problems starting to urinate a weak urine flow or stopping and starting having to strain to pass urine a frequent need to urinate waking up frequently during the night to urinate (nocturia) a sudden urge to urinate being unable to empty your bladder fully How TURP is performed TURP is carried out using a device called a resectoscope, which is a thin metal tube containing a light, camera and loop of wire. This is passed along your urethra until it reaches your prostate, which means no cuts (incisions) need to be made in your skin. The loop of wire is then heated with an electric current and is used to cut away the section of your prostate that is causing your symptoms. A thin tube called a catheter is then inserted into your urethra to pump fluid into the bladder and flush away pieces of prostate that have been removed. General or spinal anaesthesia is used during the procedure so you don't feel any pain while it's carried out. Read more about how TURP is performed. Recovering from TURP You'll usually need to stay in hospital for one to three days after your operation. The catheter used during the operation will be left in place while you're in hospital because your urethra will be swollen and you may not be able to urinate normally at first. It's common to feel tired and under the weather for a week or two after going home. Most men are up and about after this time, but you'll need to take things easy for four to eight weeks. You'll usually be advised to stay off work and avoid lifting heavy objects, doing strenuous exercise, driving and having sex for at least a few weeks. It's normal to have some difficulties urinating and some blood in your urine for a few weeks. These problems should get better as you recover, but you should contact the hospital clinic or your GP if you're concerned. Read more about recovering from TURP. What are the risks? In most cases, TURP is a safe procedure and the risk of serious complications is very small. However, many men who have a TURP lose the ability to ejaculate semen during sex or masturbation, although they still have the physical pleasure associated with ejaculation (orgasm). This is known as retrograde ejaculation. Many men also temporarily lose the ability to control their bladder (urinary incontinence), although this usually passes in a few weeks. In rare cases, it may be persistent and need further treatment. There's also a small risk of problems such as erectile dysfunction, difficulties passing urine and urinary tract infections (UTIs). Read more detailed information about the risks of TURP. Alternatives to TURP There are a number of alternatives to TURP that can be just as effective with a lower risk of complications. They include: holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP) \u2013 a laser attached to a resectoscope is used to cut away excess prostate tissue  transurethral laser resection or vaporisation of the prostate \u2013 a thin tube called a cystoscope is inserted into the urethra and a laser attached to the cystoscope fires pulses of energy to burn away prostate tissue However, these procedures aren't suitable for all men with prostate enlargement and may not be widely available. They may be more suitable for men with very large prostates, older men who are not fit enough to have TURP, and those using blood-thinning medication such as warfarin. Read more about the alternatives to TURP. Page last reviewed: 08\/06\/2015 Next review due: 08\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 310 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Prostate enlargement animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Prostate enlargement or benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common condition in older men. This animation explains what the prostate gland is and how it functions. It also highlights the importance of seeing your GP to check for prostate cancer. Media last reviewed: 22\/01\/2016 Next review due: 22\/01\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Prostate health Prostate enlargement Urinary incontinence External links British Association of Urological Surgeons: prostate procedures NICE: TURis system Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Twins","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/twins-and-multiples\/pages\/twins-and-multiples.aspx","content":"Healthy twin pregnancy - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your healthy twin pregnancy If you're pregnant with more than one baby, a healthy diet and lifestyle will help you cope with your pregnancy and give your babies the best start in life. The advice for keeping healthy in pregnancy is similar whether you're expecting twins, triplets or just one baby. Eat well, take gentle exercise, drink lots of fluid and, if you feel stressed, get support from friends and family, or talk to your midwife. It's also important to attend all your antenatal appointments so your maternity team can keep a close eye on you and your babies. Healthy eating with a twin pregnancy Expecting two babies doesn't mean you have to eat significantly more than during a single pregnancy. However, it's normal to put on more weight than a woman who is only carrying one baby. Aim to eat a healthy, balanced diet that includes plenty of fruit, vegetables and wholegrains. These will help you avoid constipation and provide a range of vitamins and minerals. You also need some protein foods, such as lean red meat, well-cooked eggs, and nuts and seeds. Dairy foods such as milk, cheese and yoghurt are important for calcium. If you feel peckish, it's best to fill up on healthy snacks, such as fresh fruit, low-fat yoghurt or sandwiches filled with grated cheese, lean ham or mashed tuna. Try to avoid foods with empty calories, such as sugary snacks, crisps and fizzy drinks. You're more at risk from anaemia during a twin pregnancy. You\u2019ll be offered extra blood tests and may be offered iron supplements. Good sources of iron include lean red meat, leafy green vegetables, beans and fortified breakfast cereals. Read more about healthy eating in pregnancy and foods to avoid in pregnancy. Staying active with a twin pregnancy Gentle exercise will help you tone your muscles and protect you from aches and pains. Exercises that won't overstress your joints are recommended, such as swimming, walking, antenatal yoga, pilates and tai chi. Doing pelvic floor exercises regularly will help your pelvic floor get back to normal after your babies are born. Even if you\u2019ve had a caesarean birth, you pelvic muscles can still be weak from your pregnancy. Read more on how to keep active in pregnancy. Common pregnancy health worries with twins It's not necessarily true that you will have more morning sickness if you\u2019re expecting twins. Although some women expecting twins or more report lots of morning sickness, others don't experience any. If you do experience morning sickness, you may find it helps to eat little and often, and to avoid getting hungry. You\u2019re more likely to experience piles and varicose veins during a multiple pregnancy, because of the weight of your babies pressing on the blood vessels of the pelvic area. Pressure from your womb (uterus) pushing on your stomach may make you more prone to heartburn and indigestion as well. You may also find you have backache and pelvic pain, particularly later in your pregnancy. Speak to your midwife, who may refer you to an obstetric physiotherapist. If you register with Tamba on their website, you can download their Healthy Multiple Pregnancy Guide for free. For more information on how to have a healthy pregnancy, feel free to read: stopping smoking drinking alcohol while pregnant   Pre and postnatal workout Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This is a gentle workout you can do during pregnancy and after birth once you have the all-clear to start exercising again. Media last reviewed: 01\/06\/2016 Next review due: 10\/03\/2019 Page last reviewed: 05\/06\/2016 Next review due: 05\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 51 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Getting ready for twins Get ready for the arrival of your twins or triplets, plus where to find the help and support you need Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services GP Hospital Maternity service Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Twisted neck","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neck-pain","content":"Neck pain and stiff neck - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neck pain and stiff neck  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neck-pain Clinical trials Neck pain Introduction  Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. The pain and stiffness usually gets better after a few days or weeks, and is rarely a sign of a more serious problem. You can get a painful or stiff neck if you sleep in an awkward position, use a computer for a prolonged period of time, or strain a muscle because of bad posture. Anxiety and stress can also sometimes cause tension in your neck muscles, which can lead to pain in your neck. You can normally manage your symptoms at home by following the advice below. Managing neck pain at home For most of the types of neck pain described above, the advice is generally the same: carry on with your normal daily activities, keep active, and take painkillers to relieve the symptoms. You can also take these steps to manage your pain: take regular doses of paracetamol, ibuprofen, or a combination of the two, to control pain \u2013 ibuprofen gel can be rubbed on to your neck as an alternative to taking tablets (always follow the instructions that come with the medication) try holding a hot water bottle or heat pack to your neck \u2013 this can help reduce the pain and any muscle spasms, although some people find cold packs offer better relief sleep on a low, firm pillow at night \u2013 using too many pillows may force your neck to bend unnaturally check your posture \u2013 bad posture can aggravate the pain, and it may have caused it in the first place avoid wearing a neck collar \u2013 there is no evidence to suggest wearing a neck collar will help to heal your neck, and it's generally better to keep your neck mobile avoid driving if you find it difficult to turn your head \u2013 this may prevent you being able to view traffic if your neck is stiff or twisted, try some neck exercises \u2013 gently tense your neck muscles as you tilt your head up and down and from side to side, and as you carefully twist your neck from left to right; these exercises will help strengthen your neck muscles and improve your range of movement You can find more information about neck exercises on the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy website. When to see your GP See your GP if the pain or stiffness does not improve after a few days or weeks, if you cannot control the pain using ordinary painkillers, or if you are worried your neck pain could have a more serious cause. Your GP will examine your neck and ask some questions to help identify any underlying condition. They may also prescribe a stronger painkiller, such as codeine, to take with your usual over-the-counter painkillers. If you have had neck pain or stiffness for a month or more, your GP may be able to refer you to a physiotherapist. If your symptoms are particularly severe or do not improve, your GP may consider prescribing more powerful medication or referring you to a pain specialist for further treatment. Read more about living with pain for further information and advice about persistent pain. What causes neck pain and stiffness? A twisted or locked neck Some people suddenly wake up one morning to find their neck twisted to one side and stuck in that position. This is known as acute torticollis and is caused by injury to the neck muscles. The exact cause of acute torticollis is unknown, but it may be caused by bad posture, sleeping without adequate neck support, or carrying heavy unbalanced loads (for example, carrying a heavy bag with one arm). Acute torticollis can take up to a week to get better, but it usually only lasts 24 to 48 hours. Wear and tear in the neck Sometimes neck pain is caused by the \"wear and tear\" that occurs to the bones and joints in your neck. This is a type of arthritis called cervical spondylosis. Cervical spondylosis occurs naturally with age. It does not always cause symptoms, although in some people the bone changes can cause neck stiffness. Nearby nerves can also be squashed, resulting in pain that radiates from the arms, pins and needles, and numbness in the hands and legs. Most cases will improve with treatment in a few weeks. Whiplash Whiplash is a neck injury caused by a sudden movement of the head forwards, backwards or sideways. It often occurs after a sudden impact such as a road traffic accident. The vigorous movement of the head overstretches and damages the tendons and ligaments in the neck. As well as neck pain and stiffness, whiplash can cause tenderness in the neck muscles, reduced and painful neck movements, and headaches. Pinched nerve Neck pain caused by a squashed nerve is known as cervical radiculopathy. It's usually caused by one of the discs between the bones of the upper spine (vertebrae) splitting open and the gel inside bulging outwards on to a nearby nerve. The condition is more common in older people because your spinal discs start to lose their water content as you get older, making them less flexible and more likely to split. The pain can sometimes be controlled with painkillers and by following the advice below, although surgery may be recommended for some people. More serious causes Your neck pain may have a more serious cause if it's persistent and getting progressively worse, or you have additional symptoms, such as: a lack of co-ordination \u2013 you may find fiddly tasks increasingly difficult problems walking loss of bladder or bowel control a high temperature (fever) unexplained weight loss A serious cause is more likely if you have recently had a significant injury \u2013 for example, you were involved in a car accident or had a fall \u2013 or you have a history of cancer or conditions that weaken your immune system, such as HIV. See your GP if you are concerned. Preventing neck pain You may find the following advice helpful in preventing neck pain: make sure you have good posture when sitting and standing \u2013 read more about how to sit correctly, how to use a laptop safely, and common posture mistakes and fixes take regular breaks from your desk, driving or any activity where your neck is held in the same position for a long period of time if you often feel stressed, try relaxation techniques to help ease any tension in your neck avoid sleeping on your front, and make sure your head is in line with your body (not tilted to the side) if you sleep on your side only use enough pillows (usually only one) to keep your head level with your body   make sure your mattress is relatively firm \u2013 a soft mattress could mean your neck is bent while you sleep Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 10\/12\/2014 Next review due: 10\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2390 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1065  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 688  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 190  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 124  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 323  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Cervical spondylosis Living with pain NHS help for people with pain Shoulder pain Whiplash External links Action on Pain: chronic pain Arthritis Research UK: neck pain Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: neck pain Pain Concern How to sit correctly Prevent back pain and other related pains with these tips on setting up your work station correctly Ways to manage persistent pain If you're in pain, keeping active will help, as well as taking painkillers and doing physiotherapy Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Type 1 diabetes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/diabetes-type1","content":"Type 1 diabetes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Type 1 diabetes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Diabetes-type1 Real stories Diabetes-type1 Clinical trials Diabetes-type1 Community Type 1 diabetes Diabetes-type1 Symptoms Diabetes-type1 Causes Diabetes-type1 Diagnosis Diabetes-type1 Treatment Diabetes-type1 Complications Diabetes-type1 Living with Introduction  Diabetes is a lifelong condition that causes a person's blood sugar (glucose) level to become too high. The hormone insulin \u2013 produced by the pancreas \u2013 is responsible for controlling the amount of glucose in the blood. There are two main types of diabetes: Type 1 \u2013 where the pancreas doesn't produce any insulin Type 2 \u2013 where the pancreas doesn't produce enough insulin or the body\u2019s cells don't react to insulin This topic is about type 1 diabetes. Read more about type 2 diabetes. Another type of diabetes, known as gestational diabetes, occurs in some pregnant women and tends to disappear following birth. It's very important for diabetes to be diagnosed as soon as possible, because it will get progressively worse if left untreated. You should therefore visit your GP if you have symptoms, which include feeling thirsty, passing urine more often than usual and feeling tired all the time (see the list below for more diabetes symptoms).  See your GP if you think you may have diabetes Results for Edit Find your GP's contact details Your location could not be found. Please try again or enter an alternative location. Please enter a location. Enter a postcode or town Use my current location MainGP is set as your GP Delete MainGP will no longer be used as your main GP Confirm Cancel Please select your GP: Sorry, there has been a problem retrieving your results. Please try again later. No GPs were found for your location Sorry, there has been a problem retrieving details of your GP. Please try again later. Type 1 and type 2 diabetes Type 1 diabetes can develop at any age, but usually appears before the age of 40, particularly in childhood. Around 10% of all diabetes is type 1, but it's the most common type of childhood diabetes. This is why it's sometimes called juvenile diabetes or early-onset diabetes.  In type 1 diabetes, the pancreas (a small gland behind the stomach) doesn't produce any insulin \u2013 the hormone that regulates blood glucose levels. This is why it's also sometimes called insulin-dependent diabetes. If the amount of glucose in the blood is too high, it can, over time, seriously damage the body's organs. In type 2 diabetes, the body either doesn't produce enough insulin to function properly, or the body's cells don't react to insulin. Around 90% of adults with diabetes have type 2, and it tends to develop later in life than type 1. Diabetes symptoms The symptoms of diabetes occur because the lack of insulin means that glucose stays in the blood and isn\u2019t used as fuel for energy. Your body tries to reduce blood glucose levels by getting rid of the excess glucose in your urine. Typical symptoms include: feeling very thirsty passing urine more often than usual, particularly at night feeling very tired weight loss and loss of muscle bulk The symptoms of type 1 diabetes usually develop very quickly in young people (over a few days or weeks). In adults, the symptoms often take longer to develop (a few months). Read more about the symptoms of type 1 diabetes. Causes of type 1 diabetes  Type 1 diabetes occurs as a result of the body being unable to produce insulin, which moves glucose out of the blood and into your cells to be used for energy. Without insulin, your body will break down its own fat and muscle, resulting in weight loss. This can lead to a serious short-term condition called diabetic ketoacidosis, where the bloodstream becomes acidic and you develop dangerous levels of dehydration. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune condition, where the immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness) mistakes the cells in your pancreas as harmful and attacks them. Read more about the causes of type 1 diabetes. Treating type 1 diabetes It's important that diabetes is diagnosed as early as possible, so that treatment can be started. Diabetes can't be cured, but treatment aims to keep your blood glucose levels as normal as possible and control your symptoms, to prevent health problems developing later in life. If you're diagnosed with diabetes, you'll be referred to a diabetes care team for specialist treatment and monitoring. As your body can't produce insulin, you'll need regular insulin injections to keep your glucose levels normal. You'll be taught how to do this and how to match the insulin you inject to the food you eat, taking into account your blood glucose level and how much exercise you do. Insulin injections come in several different forms, with each working slightly differently. Some last up to a whole day (long-acting), some last up to eight hours (short-acting) and some work quickly but don't last very long (rapid-acting). You'll most likely need a combination of different insulin preparations. There are alternatives to insulin injections, but they're only suitable for a small number of patients. They are: insulin pump therapy \u2013 where a small device constantly pumps insulin (at a rate you control) into your bloodstream through a needle that's inserted under the skin islet cell transplantation \u2013 where healthy insulin-producing cells from the pancreas of a deceased donor are implanted into the pancreas of someone with type 1 diabetes (read about the criteria for having an islet transplant) a complete pancreas transplant Read more about diagnosing diabetes and treating type 1 diabetes. Complications If diabetes is left untreated, it can cause a number of different health problems. Large amounts of glucose can damage blood vessels, nerves and organs. Even a mildly raised glucose level that doesn't cause any symptoms can have damaging effects in the long term. Read more about the complications of type 1 diabetes. Living with diabetes If you have type 1 diabetes, you'll need to look after your health very carefully. Caring for your health will also make treating your diabetes easier and minimise your risk of developing complications. For example, eating a healthy, balanced diet and exercising regularly will lower your blood glucose level. Stopping smoking (if you smoke) will also reduce your risk of developing cardiovascular disease. If you have diabetes, your eyes are at risk from diabetic retinopathy, a condition that can lead to sight loss if it's not treated. Everyone with diabetes aged 12 or over should be invited to have their eyes screened once a year. Read more about living with diabetes. Teenage diabetes: Chandler's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Chandler has type 1 diabetes. Find out how the condition has affected her life and the lives of those around her. Media last reviewed: 25\/04\/2015 Next review due: 25\/04\/2017 How common is diabetes? Diabetes is very common, with an increasing number of people being affected by the condition every year. In 2011, it was estimated that around 366 million people have diabetes worldwide, with this number predicted to grow to 552 million by 2030. In the UK, more than 1 in 20 people are thought to have either diagnosed or undiagnosed diabetes. About 90% of those affected have type 2 diabetes, with the remaining 10% having type 1 diabetes. Living with diabetes How to live healthily with diabetes, including advice on diet and lifestyle Page last reviewed: 12\/08\/2014 Next review due: 12\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 561 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 270  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 115  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 109  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Diabetes and your child Diabetic eye screening Diabetic ketoacidosis Find diabetes support services Hypoglycaemia Hyperglycaemia Long-term conditions and self care Practical support for carers Type 2 diabetes External links Diabetes: an easy read guide Diabetes UK Diabetes Research and Wellness Foundation JDRF, the type 1 diabetes charity NICE guidance: type 1 diabetes Diabetes UK: diabetes education courses Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Type 2 diabetes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Diabetes-type2","content":"Type 2 diabetes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Type 2 diabetes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Diabetes-type2 Real stories Diabetes-type2 Clinical trials Diabetes-type2 Community Diabetes-type2 Type 2 diabetes Diabetes-type2 Symptoms Diabetes-type2 Causes Diabetes-type2 Diagnosis Diabetes-type2 Treatment Diabetes-type2 Complications Diabetes-type2 Living with   Diabetes is a lifelong condition that causes a person's blood sugar level to become too high. The hormone insulin \u2013 produced by the pancreas \u2013 is responsible for controlling the amount of glucose in the blood There are two main types of diabetes: type 1 \u2013 where the pancreas doesn't produce any insulin type 2 \u2013 where the pancreas doesn't produce enough insulin or the body's cells don't react to insulin These pages are about type 2 diabetes. Read more about type 1 diabetes. Another type of diabetes, known as gestational diabetes, occurs in some pregnant women and tends to disappear after birth. Symptoms of diabetes The symptoms of diabetes occur because the lack of insulin means glucose stays in the blood and isn't used as fuel for energy. Your body tries to reduce blood glucose levels by getting rid of the excess glucose in your urine. Typical symptoms include: feeling very thirsty passing urine more often than usual, particularly at night feeling very tired weight loss and loss of muscle bulk Read more about the symptoms of type 2 diabetes. It's very important for diabetes to be diagnosed as soon as possible as it will get progressively worse if left untreated. Read about how type 2 diabetes is diagnosed. See your GP if you think you may have diabetes Results for Edit Find your GP\u2019s contact details Your location could not be found. Please try again or enter an alternative location. Please enter a location. Enter a postcode or town Use my current location MainGP is set as your GP Delete MainGP will no longer be used as your main GP Confirm Cancel Please select your GP: Sorry, there has been a problem retrieving your results. Please try again later. No GPs were found for your location Sorry, there has been a problem retrieving details of your GP. Please try again later. Causes of type 2 diabetes Type 2 diabetes occurs when the body doesn't produce enough insulin to function properly, or the body's cells don't react to insulin. This means glucose stays in the blood and isn't used as fuel for energy. Type 2 diabetes is often associated with obesity and tends to be diagnosed in older people. It's far more common than type 1 diabetes. Read about the causes and risk factors for type 2 diabetes. Treating type 2 diabetes As type 2 diabetes usually gets worse, you may eventually need medication \u2013 usually tablets \u2013 to keep your blood glucose at normal levels. Read more about the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Complications of type 2 diabetes Diabetes can cause serious long-term health problems. It's the most common cause of vision loss and blindness in people of working age. Everyone with diabetes aged 12 or over should be invited to have their eyes screened once a year for diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes is also responsible for most cases of kidney failure and lower limb amputation, other than accidents. People with diabetes are up to five times more likely to have cardiovascular disease, such as a stroke, than those without diabetes. Read more about the complications of type 2 diabetes. Preventing type 2 diabetes If you're at risk of type 2 diabetes, you may be able to prevent it developing by making lifestyle changes. These include: eating a healthy, balanced diet losing weight if you're overweight, and maintaining a healthy weight stopping smoking if you smoke drinking alcohol in moderation taking plenty of regular exercise Living with type 2 diabetes If you already have type 2 diabetes, it may be possible to control your symptoms by making the above changes. This also minimises your risk of developing complications. Read more about living with type 2 diabetes. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_67\/accessible.html Page last reviewed: 27\/06\/2016 Next review due: 27\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1709 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 793  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 434  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 286  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Diabetic retinopathy Gestational diabetes Living with diabetes NHS Health Check Type 1 diabetes Video: eat well on a south Asian diet Find diabetes support services Diabetic eye screening External links Diabetes Research and Wellness Foundation Diabetes UK Diabetes UK: type 2 diabetes easy read guide (PDF, 8.51Mb) healthtalk.org: type 2 diabetes HealthUnlocked: healthy eating Lab Tests Online UK: HbA1c test National Obesity Forum Diabetes UK: diabetes education courses Reduce diabetes risk You can lower your risk of type 2 diabetes by maintaining a healthy weight Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Typhoid fever","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Typhoid-fever","content":"Typhoid fever - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Typhoid fever  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Typhoid-fever Real stories Typhoid-fever Clinical trials Typhoid fever Typhoid-fever Symptoms Typhoid-fever Causes Typhoid-fever Diagnosis Typhoid-fever Treatment Typhoid-fever Complications Typhoid-fever Vaccination Introduction  Typhoid fever is a bacterial infection that can spread throughout the body, affecting many organs. Without prompt treatment, it can cause serious complications and can be fatal. It's caused by a bacterium called Salmonella typhi, which is related to the bacteria that cause salmonella food poisoning. Typhoid fever is highly contagious. An infected person can pass the bacteria out of their body in their stools (faeces) or, less commonly, in their urine. If someone else eats food or drinks water that's been contaminated with a small amount of infected faeces or urine, they can become infected with the bacteria and develop typhoid fever. Read more about the causes of typhoid fever. Who's affected? Typhoid fever is most common in parts of the world that have poor sanitation and limited access to clean water (at the bottom of this page is a list of high-risk areas). Worldwide, children are thought to be most at risk of developing typhoid fever. This may be because their immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness) is still developing. However, children with typhoid fever tend to have milder symptoms than adults. Typhoid fever is uncommon in the UK, with an estimated 500 cases occurring each year. In most of these cases, the person developed the infection while visiting relatives in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. However, you're also at risk of developing the infection if you visit Asia, Africa and South America. Signs and symptoms of typhoid fever Common symptoms of typhoid fever include: a high temperature that can reach 39-40C (103-104F) stomach pain headache constipation or diarrhoea If typhoid fever isn't treated, the symptoms will continue to get worse over the following weeks and the risk of developing potentially fatal complications will increase. Read more about the symptoms of typhoid fever and the complications of typhoid fever. How typhoid fever is treated Typhoid fever requires prompt treatment with antibiotics. If diagnosed at an early stage, the infection is likely to be mild and can usually be treated at home with a 7- to 14-day course of antibiotic tablets. More serious cases of typhoid fever usually require admission to hospital, so antibiotic injections can be given. With prompt antibiotic treatment, most people will start to feel better within a few days and serious complications are very rare. Deaths from typhoid fever are now virtually unheard of in the UK. If typhoid fever isn't treated, it's estimated that up to one in five people with the condition will die. Some of those who survive will have complications caused by the infection. Read more about treating typhoid fever. Typhoid fever vaccination In the UK, two vaccines are available that can provide some protection against typhoid fever. These involve either having a single injection or taking three capsules over alternate days. Vaccination is recommended for anyone planning to travel to parts of the world where typhoid fever is widespread (see below). It's particularly important if you're planning to live or work closely with local people. However, as neither vaccine offers 100% protection, it's also important to follow some precautions when travelling. For example, you should only drink bottled or boiled water, and avoid foods that could potentially be contaminated. Read more about the typhoid fever vaccination. High-risk areas The areas with the highest rates of typhoid fever are: the Indian subcontinent Africa South and South East Asia South America the Middle East Europe Central America When travelling to a foreign country, it's a good idea to make a list of relevant contact details and telephone numbers, in case of an emergency. Read more about travel health and travel advice by country on the GOV.UK website. Page last reviewed: 06\/07\/2015 Next review due: 06\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 319 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 146  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Food and water abroad Healthcare abroad Travel health Travel illnesses and vaccinations Travel vaccinations External links Fit for Travel GOV.UK: foreign travel advice NaTHNaC: travellers Travel health Advice for people travelling abroad. Get the facts on malaria, travel vaccinations, EHIC, travel insurance, DVT and jet lag Food and water abroad Find out how to protect yourself against illnesses in contaminated food and water Find and choose services for Typhoid fever Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Typhus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/typhus","content":"Typhus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Typhus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Typhus Introduction  Typhus is a sudden severe illness caused by infection with Rickettsia bacteria. Outbreaks of typhus tend to occur in developing countries and areas where there is poverty, homelessness, close human contact and poor sanitation. The Rickettsia bacteria that cause typhus are carried by body lice, ticks, mites and fleas. This page covers the main types: epidemic typhus (the most serious form) \u2013 this type occurs in Africa, South America and Asia, and is transmitted by body lice  endemic typhus (the milder form of the disease) \u2013 it occurs throughout the world and is transmitted by ticks, mites and fleas  scrub typhus (also called Tsutsugamushi fever) \u2013 this type is caught from mites infected with Orientia tsutsugamushi bacteria, which live in heavy scrub vegetation in parts of rural southeast Asia, Oceania and northern Australia Typhus is generally not a problem in the UK. But you may become infected abroad if you catch Rickettsia-infected lice from infested people or bedding (in budget accommodation or on a sleeper train, for example), or if you are bitten by a Rickettsia-infected tick, mite or flea. How do you catch epidemic typhus? Epidemic typhus is passed from human to human by body lice. These are not the same as head lice or pubic lice, which are a nuisance, but don't transmit disease. The body lice become infected with Rickettsia prowazekii bacteria when they feed on the blood of an infected person. If you catch these infected body lice (for example, by using a louse-infested blanket), their infected faeces will be deposited on your skin as they feed on your blood. You only need to scratch a bite to rub the contaminated lice faeces into the tiny wound on your skin to become infected. Less commonly, you can catch epidemic typhus by breathing infected dried body louse faeces in airborne dust. How do you catch endemic typhus? Endemic typhus is transmitted by ticks, mites and fleas infected with Rickettsia bacteria. These animal carriers of typhus may live in thick scrub vegetation or on small mammals or rodents, such as rats. What are the symptoms? The symptoms of epidemic, endemic and scrub typhus are similar. Typically, someone with typhus will start to feel unwell 10 to 14 days after becoming infected. A sudden, severe headache is often the first symptom. Other symptoms may include: a fever \u2013 where body temperature rises above 38.9C\/102F for up to two weeks a pink or red rash that starts on the chest and spreads to the arms, hands, legs and feet \u2013 but not the face, palms and soles nausea and vomiting abdominal pain and diarrhoea joint and muscle pain \u2013 backache is common a cough In addition, the person with typhus is often mentally dazed or delirious \u2013 the word \"typhus\" comes from the Greek word meaning \"a cloud\". They may become deaf or have ringing in the ears (tinnitus). These symptoms usually last around two weeks. How is typhus diagnosed and treated? Anyone who is unwell shortly after visiting a high-risk country should see their GP, who will listen to your symptoms and take note of the countries you have recently visited. You will also be physically examined and have a number of tests \u2013 for example, a blood test to rule out other diseases such as malaria. If there is a rash, the GP may take a skin biopsy (a small sample of skin from the rash) and send this to a laboratory for testing. A diagnosis of typhus is confirmed if the Rickettsia bacteria are identified in a blood or skin sample. But the patient may be started on antibiotics even before the results come back if typhus is suspected. If treated promptly with either doxycycline or tetracycline, most patients improve dramatically within 48 hours of treatment and make a full recovery. If the patient has epidemic typhus (the more serious type), they may need to take antibiotics through a drip in their arm (intravenously) while they are in hospital. What are the possible complications? If typhus is not diagnosed and treated promptly, there is a risk of developing complications, including: long-term hearing loss or tinnitus low blood pressure organ damage and kidney failure secondary bacterial infection, such as pneumonia seizures confusion drowsiness gangrene The patient may need to have hospital follow-up for some months after recovering from an attack of typhus to receive treatment for these long-term problems. Brill-Zinsser disease Some people who previously had epidemic typhus will develop a milder form of the disease years later called Brill-Zinsser disease. This tends to happen when the bacteria were not properly killed off the first time and lie dormant (inactive) in the body. The bacteria then reactivate at a later date when the person's immune system is weak. Brill-Zinsser disease will need treating again with antibiotics. Can typhus be prevented? There's currently no licensed vaccine for typhus. The best way to avoid becoming infected with typhus is to avoid areas or crowds where louse-borne typhus is a problem, and take care to avoid contact with ticks, mites and fleas. Wash and change your clothes regularly, and don't use any bedding or clothing that could be infested with body lice. If you're about to travel abroad to an area where typhus is a problem, talk to your doctor about taking weekly doses of doxycycline to prevent infection. This is especially effective against scrub typhus. Orientia tsutsugamushi bacteria (which cause scrub typhus) inside the the abdominal cavity of an infected mouse  Page last reviewed: 24\/11\/2014 Next review due: 24\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 23 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Healthcare abroad Travel health External links fitfortravel National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}