{"conditions":[{"name":"Xanthelasma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/eyelid-problems","content":"Eyelid problems - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Eyelid problems  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Eyelid problems Introduction  Eyelid problems are common and rarely serious, but see your GP if you're worried or your eye is particularly uncomfortable. Contact your GP or NHS 111 immediately, or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department, if you also have pain in or around your eye or any loss of vision. The information below should give you an idea of what might be wrong, although it shouldn't be used to self-diagnose your condition. It covers possible causes for the following eyelid problems, plus specific advice about what to do. You can find out about: swollen eyelids or eyelid cysts   itchy, flaky or sticky eyelids  lumps on or around the eyelids  hooded or droopy upper eyelids  rolling outwards of the lower eyelids (ectropion)  rolling inwards of the eyelids (entropion)  yellow plaques on the eyelids  excessive blinking or uncontrollable closure of the eyelids  Swollen eyelid or eyelid cyst It's quite common for the upper or lower eyelid to become swollen because of a meibomian cyst (also called a chalazion). This occurs when the glands in the eyelid become blocked. These cysts vary in size, from barely visible to the size of a grape. They usually take weeks to develop. They're not usually painful, but can become red and painful if infected. The cysts can come and go by themselves, although they may take a few months to get better. You can help them heal by holding a clean flannel warmed in hot water to the closed eye for five minutes, and repeating this three to four times a day for up to four weeks. Speak to your GP if you have a cyst that doesn't clear up after a month. They can refer you to have it drained through a small incision (cut). This is a simple procedure carried out under local anaesthetic (your eye area will be numbed). It takes just a few minutes and rarely leaves a scar. Also see your GP if the cyst becomes infected because you may need to take antibiotics to prevent a deep lid infection (cellulitis). Another common cause of a swelling on the eyelid is a stye. A stye is a minor infection of the base of an eyelash that usually clears up on its own in a week or two. Holding a warm flannel to it regularly may help it heal faster. Read more about treating styes. Other causes of lid swelling include an allergic reaction and shingles on the face and eye (usually with a rash), but these are less common. Itchy, flaky or sticky eyelids Itchy and flaky eyelids are usually caused by an inflamed eyelid edge (blepharitis) or dry eye. Your eyelids may also stick together and be difficult to open, particularly when you wake up. These conditions can be irritating, but are rarely serious. You can reduce the irritation by keeping the eyelids clean and using artificial tears if your eyes are dry. Read about treating blepharitis and treating dry eyes. Contact dermatitis is another possible cause of itchy or flaky eyelids. This is a type of eczema triggered when the skin comes into contact with something you are irritated by or allergic to, such as make-up. The condition usually clears up after you stop using the substance your skin is reacting to. Sticky eyelids along with red and watering eyes can be caused by conjunctivitis, which is when an infection, allergy or irritant causes the front of the eye to become inflamed. This can get better on its own, although your GP may be able to prescribe medication to treat the underlying cause. Read more about treating conjunctivitis. Lumps on or around the eyelids Just like anywhere else on the skin, lumps can occur on or around the eyelids. Many lumps are simple cysts or styes (see above). However, occasionally a lump can be a sign of a more serious condition such as skin cancer and may need to be removed. See your GP if you're worried about a lump on or around your eyelids. Most skin cancers are basal cell carcinomas, which very rarely spread to other parts of the body. These often appear as a red or pink lump containing small blood vessels, although they can be pearly-white or \"waxy\" looking. Sometimes they may bleed. Less commonly, the lump may be a squamous cell carcinoma, which is more serious as there\u2019s a small risk it could spread to other parts of the body. These usually look like an ulcer with a red base and a scaly and crusted surface. You may also lose eyelashes where the lump is growing. In rare cases, the lump could be a sign of a very serious type of skin cancer called melanoma that can spread to other parts of the body and can be very dangerous. A lump is more likely to be melanoma if it's an irregular shape, dark or changing in colour, and getting a lot bigger over time. Hooded or droopy upper eyelids As you get older, it's quite common to have excess skin above the upper eyelids that can overhang and block your vision. This is called dermatochalasis. If it affects your vision, surgery may be considered to remove the excess skin (blepharoplasty). However, this operation isn\u2019t routinely funded on the NHS so your doctor would need to submit a funding request for this to be considered. If the edge of your upper lid droops down over your eye, it's called ptosis. This is usually age-related and develops slowly. Surgery may be needed if the edge of the lid droops so much your vision is affected. In rare cases, ptosis isn't related to age and may be caused by serious conditions such as myasthenia gravis or a brain tumour. In these cases, it's likely there would be other symptoms too. See your GP immediately if ptosis comes on rapidly, over days or weeks, or if it's associated with other symptoms, such as a headache, loss of vision or a change in the size of the pupil (the black dot at the centre of the eye). Lower eyelid that rolls outwards (ectropion)  As you get older, one or both lower eyelids can sometimes droop away from the eye and turn outwards. This is known as an ectropion. The drooping eyelid can disrupt the normal production of tears, which can cause your eye to become dry, red and irritated. Treatment may not be needed in mild cases, although drops or ointment may help make your eye more comfortable. Sometimes a minor operation is needed to correct the position of the eyelid. Read more about treating ectropion. Eyelids that roll inwards (entropion) Entropion is where the eyelid rolls inwards. It usually affects the lower lids, but it can also affect the upper lids. Like ectropion, this is often age-related. Entropion usually causes an uncomfortable watery eye because the lashes irritate the front of the eye (cornea). If this is mild, using eyedrops may be enough to protect the eye and keep you comfortable. Severe entropion can be painful and cause vision loss by damaging the cornea. Occasionally, a corneal ulcer can form and become infected. Surgery may be needed to correct entropion if it's posing a risk to the health of your eye or is causing considerable discomfort. This is carried out under local anaesthetic. If you have entropion, you should discuss your treatment options with your GP. Consult your GP immediately if your eye becomes painful and red and your vision is affected. Yellow plaques on the eyelids Flat yellow patches (plaques) over the upper or lower eyelids are called xanthelasma.  Although these plaques are harmless, they indicate you have high cholesterol. See your GP because you may be at risk of developing cardiovascular disease, such as heart attacks and strokes. Making changes to your diet and taking medication may be recommended to reduce your cholesterol level and reduce your risk of serious problems in the future, although these may not improve the plaques. If you're bothered by the appearance of the plaques, it may be possible for them to be surgically removed or treated with a laser. However, this isn't normally funded on the NHS. Excessive blinking or uncontrollable closure of the eyelids It's quite common and normal for the eyelid to flicker or twitch occasionally, particularly when you're tired. It's more unusual to have repeated spasms of excessive blinking and involuntary closure of one or both eyes. This is a type of dystonia (a movement disorder that causes muscle spasms and contractions) known as blepharospasm. Each spasm can last for a few seconds to a few minutes. The exact cause of blepharospasm is unknown. However, the blinking and closure can be triggered by bright light, stress or tiredness. Severe blepharospasm can be very disabling and embarrassing. However, an effective treatment is available. It involves having small injections of botulinum toxin (such as Botox) into the face to relax the muscles controlling the eyelids. In some cases, your GP may consider referring you to a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves) for further investigation. Page last reviewed: 03\/06\/2015 Next review due: 03\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 572 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 241  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 153  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blepharitis Conjunctivitis Dry eye syndrome Ectropion Styes Watering eyes External links Easy read information about looking after your eyelids (PDF, 101kb) The Royal College of Ophthalmologists: patient information Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Xerostomia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/dry-mouth","content":"Dry mouth - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Dry mouth  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview dry-mouth Clinical trials Dry mouth Introduction  It's normal to occasionally have a dry mouth if you\u2019re dehydrated or feeling nervous, but a persistently dry mouth can be a sign of an underlying problem. You should see your dentist or GP if you have an unusually dry mouth (known as xerostomia) so they can try to determine the cause. What can cause a dry mouth? A dry mouth can occur when the salivary glands in your mouth don't produce enough saliva. This is often the result of dehydration, which means you don\u2019t have enough fluid in your body to produce the saliva you need. It's also common for your mouth to become dry if you're feeling anxious or nervous. A dry mouth can sometimes be caused by an underlying problem or medical condition, such as: medication \u2013 many different medications can cause a dry mouth, including antidepressants, antihistamines and diuretics; check the leaflet that comes with your medicine, or find it in the Medicines A-Z to see if dry mouth is listed as a side effect a blocked nose \u2013 breathing through your mouth while you sleep can cause it to dry out diabetes \u2013 a lifelong condition that causes a person's blood sugar level to become too high radiotherapy to the head and neck \u2013 this can cause the salivary glands to become inflamed (mucositis) Sjögren's syndrome \u2013 a condition where the immune system attacks and damages the salivary glands If you see your dentist or GP, let them know about any other symptoms you're experiencing and any treatments you\u2019re having, as this will help them work out why your mouth is dry. What problems can a dry mouth cause? Saliva plays an important role in keeping your mouth healthy. If you have a dry mouth, you may experience a number of other problems too, such as: a burning sensation or soreness in your mouth dry lips bad breath (halitosis) a decreased or altered sense of taste recurrent mouth infections, such as oral thrush tooth decay and gum disease difficulty speaking, eating or swallowing It\u2019s important to maintain good oral hygiene if you have a dry mouth to reduce the risk of dental problems. You should also see a dentist regularly, so they can identify and treat any problems early on. Treating a dry mouth Treating the underlying cause If your doctor or dentist is able to determine what's causing your dry mouth, treating this may improve your symptoms. For example, if medication is suspected as the cause of your dry mouth, your doctor may reduce your dose or suggest trying an alternative medication. Some of the conditions mentioned above have specific treatments, such as nasal decongestants for a blocked nose and insulin for diabetes. Things to try yourself There are simple measures you can try to help keep your mouth moist. For example, it may help to: increase your fluid intake \u2013 take regular sips of cold water or an unsweetened drink suck on sugar-free sweets or chew sugar-free gum \u2013 this can stimulate your salivary glands to produce more saliva suck on ice cubes \u2013 the ice will melt slowly and moisten your mouth avoid alcohol (including alcohol-based mouthwashes), caffeine and smoking \u2013 these can all make a dry mouth worse Saliva substitutes and stimulants If the measures above don\u2019t help, your dentist, GP or specialist may suggest using an artificial saliva substitute to keep your mouth moist. This may come in the form of a spray, gel or lozenge. Use it as often as you need to, including before and during meals. If your dry mouth is caused by radiotherapy or Sjögren's syndrome, a medication called pilocarpine may be prescribed. This is taken as a tablet several times a day to help stimulate your salivary glands to produce more saliva. However, pilocarpine isn't suitable for everyone, as it may cause side effects, such as sweating or headaches. Page last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 359 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 147  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 108  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dehydration Diabetes Radiotherapy Sjögren's syndrome Thirst External links British Sjögren's syndrome Association (BSSA) Diabetes.co.uk: dry mouth and diabetes Water and drinks Find out how much you need to drink and how to choose healthier soft drinks Mucositis Find out about mucositis, which can develop as a side effect of radiotherapy or chemotherapy, and can cause painful mouth ulcers NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"X-ray","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/X-ray","content":"X-ray - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories X-ray  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview X-ray Clinical trials X-ray Introduction  An X-ray is a quick and painless procedure commonly used to produce images of the inside of the body. It's a very effective way of looking at the bones and can be used to help detect a range of conditions. X-rays are usually carried out in hospital X-ray departments by trained specialists called radiographers, although they can also be done by other healthcare professionals, such as dentists. How X-rays work X-rays are a type of radiation that can pass through the body. They can't be seen by the naked eye and you can't feel them. As they pass through the body, the energy from X-rays is absorbed at different rates by different parts of the body. A detector on the other side of the body picks up the X-rays after they've passed through and turns them into an image. Dense parts of your body that X-rays find it more difficult to pass through, such as bone, show up as clear white areas on the image. Softer parts that X-rays can pass through more easily, such as your heart and lungs, show up as darker areas. When X-rays are used X-rays can be used to examine most areas of the body. They're mainly used to look at the bones and joints, although they're sometimes used to detect problems affecting soft tissue, such as internal organs. Problems that may be detected during an X-ray include: bone fractures and breaks tooth problems, such as loose teeth and dental abscesses scoliosis (abnormal curvature of the spine) non-cancerous and cancerous bone tumours lung problems, such as pneumonia and lung cancer dysphagia (swallowing problems) heart problems, such as heart failure breast cancer X-rays can also be used to guide doctors or surgeons during certain procedures. For example, during a coronary angioplasty \u2013 a procedure to widen narrowed arteries near the heart \u2013 X-rays can be used to help guide a catheter (a long, thin, flexible tube) along one of your arteries. Preparing for an X-ray You don't usually need to do anything special to prepare for an X-ray. You can eat and drink as normal beforehand and can continue taking your usual medications. However, you may need to stop taking certain medications and avoid eating and drinking for a few hours if you're having an X-ray that uses a contrast agent (see contrast X-rays below). For all X-rays, you should let the hospital know if you're pregnant. X-rays aren't usually recommended for pregnant women unless it's an emergency (for more information, see Can I have an X-ray if I'm pregnant?). It's a good idea to wear loose comfortable clothes, as you may be able to wear these during the X-ray. Try to avoid wearing jewellery and clothes containing metal (such as zips), as these will need to be removed. Having an X-ray During an X-ray, you'll usually be asked to lie on a table or stand against a flat surface so that the part of your body being examined can be positioned in the right place. The X-ray machine, which looks like a tube containing a large light bulb, will be carefully aimed at the part of the body being examined by the radiographer. They will operate the machine from behind a screen or from the next room. The X-ray will last for a fraction of a second. You won't feel anything while it's carried out. While the X-ray is being taken, you'll need to keep still so the image produced isn't blurred. More than one X-ray may be taken from different angles to provide as much information as possible The procedure will usually only take a few minutes. Contrast X-rays In some cases, a substance called a contrast agent may be given before an X-ray is carried out. This can help show soft tissues more clearly on the X-ray. Types of X-rays involving a contrast agent include: barium swallow \u2013 a substance called barium is swallowed to help highlight the upper digestive system barium enema \u2013 barium is passed into your bowel through your bottom angiography \u2013 iodine is injected into a blood vessel to highlight the heart and blood vessels intravenous urogram (IVU) \u2013 iodine is injected into a blood vessel to highlight the kidneys and bladder These types of X-rays may need special preparation beforehand and will usually take longer to carry out. Your appointment letter will mention anything you need to do to prepare. What happens after an X-ray You won't experience any after effects from a standard X-ray and will be able to go home shortly afterwards. You can return to your normal activities straight away. You may have some temporary side effects from the contrast agent if one was used during your X-ray. For example, barium can turn your poo a whitish colour for a few days and an injection given to relax your stomach before the X-ray may cause your eyesight to be blurry for a few hours. Some people develop a rash or feel sick after having an iodine injection. The X-ray images will often need to be examined by a doctor called a radiologist before you're told the results. They may discuss their findings with you on the same day, or they may send a report to your GP or the doctor who requested the X-ray, who can discuss the results with you a few days later. Are X-rays safe? People are often concerned about being exposed to radiation during an X-ray. However, the part of your body being examined will only be exposed to a low level of radiation for a fraction of a second. Generally, the amount of radiation you're exposed to during an X-ray is the equivalent to between a few days and a few years of exposure to natural radiation from the environment. Being exposed to X-rays does carry a risk of causing cancer many years or decades later, but this risk is thought to be very small. For example, an X-ray of your chest, limbs or teeth is equivalent to a few days' worth of background radiation, and has less than a 1 in 1,000,000 chance of causing cancer. For more information, see GOV.UK: patient dose information. The benefits and risks of having an X-ray will be weighed up before it's recommended. Talk to your doctor or radiographer about the potential risks beforehand, if you have any concerns. Page last reviewed: 05\/08\/2015 Next review due: 05\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 418 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 240  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Angiography Barium enema CT scan DEXA scan MRI scan Radiation Ultrasound scan External links British Institute of Radiology: X-ray safety Cancer Research UK: X-rays CT scan Find out why CT scans are used and read about what happens before, during and after the scan MRI scan An MRI scan uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to produce detailed images of the inside of the body NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"XXY (Klinefelter syndrome)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/klinefelters-syndrome","content":"Klinefelter syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Klinefelter syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Klinefelter syndrome   Klinefelter syndrome (sometimes called Klinefelter's, KS or XXY) is where boys and men are born with an extra X chromosome. Chromosomes are packages of genes found in every cell in the body. Two types of chromosome, called the sex chromosomes, determine the genetic sex of a baby. These are named either X or Y. Usually, a female baby has two X chromosomes (XX) and a male has one X and one Y (XY). But in Klinefelter syndrome, a boy is born with an extra copy of the X chromosome (XXY). The X chromosome is not a \"female\" chromosome and is present in everyone. The presence of a Y chromosome denotes male sex. Boys and men with Klinefelter syndrome are still genetically male, and often will not realise they have this extra chromosome, but occasionally it can cause problems that may require treatment. Klinefelter syndrome is quite common, affecting around 1 in every 660 males. This page covers: Symptoms Health issues Causes Testing and diagnosis Treatments More information and support Symptoms of Klinefelter syndrome Klinefelter syndrome doesn't usually cause any obvious symptoms early in childhood, and even the later symptoms may be difficult to spot. Many boys and men don't realise they have it. Possible features, which aren't always present, may include: in babies and toddlers \u2013 learning to sit up, crawl, walk and talk later than usual, being weaker, quieter and more passive than usual in childhood \u2013 shyness and low self-confidence, problems with reading, writing, spelling and paying attention, mild dyslexia and\/or dyspraxia, low energy levels, difficulty socialising or expressing feelings in teenagers \u2013 growing taller than expected for the family (with long arms and legs), broad hips, poor muscle tone and slower than usual muscle growth, reduced facial and body hair that starts growing later than usual, a small penis and testicles, enlarged breasts (gynaecomastia) in adulthood \u2013 inability to have children naturally (infertility) and a low sex drive, in addition to the physical characteristics mentioned above Health issues in Klinefelter syndrome Most boys and men with Klinefelter syndrome will not be significantly affected and can live normal, healthy lives. Infertility tends to be the main problem, although there are treatments that can help (see Treatments below). However, men with Klinefelter syndrome are at a slightly increased risk of developing other health problems, including: type 2 diabetes weak and fragile bones (osteoporosis) cardiovascular disease and blood clots autoimmune disorders (where the immune system mistakenly attacks the body), such as lupus an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) anxiety, learning difficulties and depression \u2013 although intelligence is usually unaffected male breast cancer \u2013 although this is very rare These problems can usually be treated if they do occur and testosterone replacement therapy may help reduce the risk of some of them. Causes of Klinefelter syndrome Klinefelter syndrome is caused by an additional X chromosome. This chromosome carries extra copies of genes, which interfere with the development of the testicles and mean they produce less testosterone (male sex hormone) than usual. The extra genetic information may either be carried in every cell in the body or it may only affect some cells (known as mosaic Klinefelter syndrome). Klinefelter syndrome isn't directly inherited \u2013 the additional X chromosome occurs as a result of either the mother's egg or the father's sperm having the extra X chromosome (an equal chance of this happening in either), so after conception the chromosome pattern is XXY rather than XY. This change in the egg or sperm seems to happen randomly. If you have a son with the condition, the chances of this happening again are very small. However, the risk of a woman having a son with Klinefelter syndrome may be slightly higher if the mother is over 35 years of age. Testing for Klinefelter syndrome See your GP if you have concerns about your son's development or you notice any troubling symptoms of Klinefelter syndrome in yourself or your son. Klinefelter syndrome isn't necessarily anything serious, but treatment can help reduce some of the symptoms if necessary. In many cases, it's only detected if a man with the condition undergoes fertility tests. Your GP may suspect Klinefelter syndrome after a physical examination and they may suggest sending off a sample of blood to check reproductive hormone levels. The diagnosis can be confirmed by checking a sample of blood for the presence of the extra X chromosome. Treatments for Klinefelter syndrome There's no cure for Klinefelter syndrome, but some of the problems associated with the condition can be treated if necessary. Possible treatments include: testosterone replacement therapy (see below) speech and language therapy during childhood to help with speech development educational and behavioural support at school to help with any learning difficulties or behaviour problems occupational therapy to help with any co-ordination problems associated with dyspraxia physiotherapy to help build muscle and increase strength psychological support for any mental health issues fertility treatment \u2013 options include artificial insemination using donor sperm or possibly intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), where sperm removed during a small operation are used to fertilise an egg in a laboratory breast reduction surgery to remove excess breast tissue Testosterone replacement therapy TRT involves taking medication containing testosterone. It can be taken in the form of gels or tablets in teenagers, or given as gel or injections in adult men. TRT may be considered once puberty begins and may help with the development of a deep voice, facial and body hair, an increase in muscle mass, reduction in body fat, and improvement in energy. You should see a specialist in children's hormones (a paediatric endocrinologist) at this time. Long-term treatment during adulthood may also help with several other problems associated with Klinefelter syndrome \u2013 including osteoporosis, low mood, reduced sex drive, low self-esteem and low energy levels \u2013 although it can't reverse infertility. More information and support If you or your son has been diagnosed with Klinefelter syndrome, you might find it useful to find out more about it and get in touch with others affected by it. The following websites may be able to help: Klinefelter's Syndrome Association UK Klinefelter Organisation Contact a Family Information about your child If your son has Klinefelter syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about him on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Page last reviewed: 23\/06\/2016 Next review due: 23\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 79 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Infertility Undescended testicles Enlarged breasts in men Genetics External links Klinefelter's Syndrome Association UK Klinefelter Organisation Contact a Family: Klinefelter syndrome Genetics Find out how you inherit your physical and behavioural characteristics, plus learn about testing for genetic conditions Fertility Find out about the treatments and support available if you have fertility problems NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}