{"conditions":[{"name":"Nail abnormalities","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nail-abnormalities","content":"Nail abnormalities - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nail abnormalities  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Fingernail or toenail abnormalities can tell you a lot about your health. They're often a sign of a fungal nail infection or injury, but can sometimes indicate a more serious underlying disease. Visit your GP if your nails have changed in colour, texture, shape or thickness and you don't know why (you haven't injured your nails or been biting them). This guide gives the most likely reasons for the following nail problems: brittle or crumbly nails  discoloured nails  white nails  thickened, overgrown nails  loose nails  indented spoon-shaped nails  pitting or dents on the nails  grooves going across the width of the nails  unusually curved fingertips and nails  white lines running across the nails  dark stripes running down the nail  red or brown little streaks under the nails  a destroyed nail  infected nail fold (painful, red and swollen skin next to the nail) Brittle or crumbly nails Brittle nails are often just a sign of ageing or long-term exposure to water or chemicals such as detergents and nail polish. Nails can be strengthened by taking biotin (vitamin B7) supplements, by wearing gloves for all wet work and by frequently applying moisturising cream to the nails. Sometimes, brittle or crumbly nails can be caused by: a fungal nail infection, which can be cleared by taking a course of antifungal tablets (this especially tends to be the cause for crumbly toenails) a skin condition called lichen planus, which can just affect the nails an underactive thyroid or overactive thyroid, where the thyroid gland either doesn't produce enough hormones or produces too many nail psoriasis, a long-term skin condition that can cause the nails to become crumbly A less common cause of crumbly nails is reactive arthritis, an unusual reaction of the immune system affecting the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection. If you have a combination of symptoms affecting different parts of your body, your GP might consider this condition. Discoloured nails The most common causes of a yellow nail are fungal nail infections or nail psoriasis. Yellow nails can also result from any of the following: frequent application of nail varnish lymphoedema, a long-term condition that causes swelling of the skin permanent damage to your airways caused by bronchiectasis (a long-term lung condition) sinusitis (inflammation of the lining of the sinuses) inflammation of the thyroid gland, found in the neck tuberculosis (TB), a bacterial infection affecting the lungs jaundice (yellowing of the skin) due to liver disease some drugs, such as mepacrine or carotene   chronic paronychia (infection of the nail fold) Green-black nails can be caused by overgrowth of bacteria called pseudomonas, especially under loose nails. This can be treated by applying antibiotic eye drops underneath the nails or soaking the affected nails in an antiseptic solution or vinegar. Grey nails can be caused by medication such as antimalarials or minocycline. Brown nails can sometimes be caused by thyroid disease, pregnancy, malnutrition and frequent use of nail varnish. Red or yellow drop under the nail If the discolouration looks like a drop of oil under the nail plate or is the colour of salmon, you may have psoriasis of the nails. Half white, half brown nails Fingernails that are half white and half brown (brown near the tips) can be a sign of kidney failure, where the kidneys stop working properly. The link is not fully understood, but one theory is that kidney failure causes chemical changes in the blood that encourage melanin (a skin pigment) to be released into the nail bed. It's also possible that kidney failure causes an increase in the number of tiny blood vessels in the nail bed. It's estimated up to 40% of people with kidney failure have \"half-and-half\" fingernails. Half-and-half nails have also been seen in some people with AIDS and can be seen following chemotherapy. White nails If most of the nail plate has turned white and it's not because the nail has become detached from the nail bed, it's likely to be either a fungal nail infection or a sign of decreased blood supply to the nail bed, known as \"Terry's nails\". Terry's nails are typically white with reddened or dark tips and can be a sign of a wide range of medical conditions, including the following: liver cirrhosis (scarring and damage to the liver) \u2013 about 80% of people with cirrhosis have Terry's nails liver, kidney or heart failure diabetes iron-deficiency anaemia \u2013 a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body chemotherapy an overactive thyroid (where the thyroid gland in your neck produces too many hormones) malnutrition  Thickened, overgrown nails A common cause of thickened nails is a fungal nail infection. This can also cause them to discolour and become crumbly (see above). Other possible causes of thickened or overgrown nails are: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin long-term pressure from shoes that are either too small or too narrow over the toes reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection Severely overgrown horn-like nails Sometimes, the big toenails become so overgrown and thickened that they resemble claws and are almost impossible to cut with conventional nail clippers. This nail disorder is known as onychogryphosis (\"ram's horn nails\"), and is seen in older people or as a response to long-term pressure on the nails. Regular chiropody can help, but sometimes the nails need to be removed by a podiatrist or doctor. Loose nails It's normal for a toenail to come loose and fall off after an injury to the toe. However, if you haven't injured your nail, a loose nail is often caused by over-manicuring the nails and cleaning under the nails with a sharp object. Less commonly, it may be a sign of one of the following health conditions: a fungal nail infection psoriasis of the nail \u2013 psoriasis is a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin warts that cluster around the fingernail an overactive thyroid, which means the thyroid gland in the neck is producing too many hormones  sarcoidosis, a condition where small clumps of cells form in the organs and tissues of the body amyloidosis, where protein builds up in the organs a problem with the connective tissue fibres in the body that support the organs and body tissues poor circulation, for example caused by smoking or Raynaud's disease  an allergic reaction to medicine (usually to a type of antibiotic) or nail cosmetics A loose nail should be cut back to where it's detached to allow the nail to become reattached as it grows. You shouldn't clean your nails with anything other than a soft nailbrush. Indented spoon-shaped nails (koilonychia) If your fingernails curve inwards like spoons (known medically as koilonychia), you may have one of the following disorders: iron-deficiency anaemia, which is a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body haemochromatosis, where the body contains too much iron Raynaud\u2019s disease, a common condition affecting the blood supply to the fingers and toes, causing them to turn white  lupus erythematosus, an uncommon condition where the immune system attacks the body's cells, tissues and organs Pitting or dents on the nails Pitting or small dents on the surface of your nails can be a sign of any of the following diseases: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin (10%-50% of patients with psoriasis have pitted nails) eczema, a long-term skin condition reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection alopecia areata, patches of hair loss that tend to come and go Grooves across the fingernails (Beau's lines) Deep lines or grooves that go from left to right across the nail are known as Beau's lines. They may be a sign of: a previous illness \u2013 the line forms at the time of the illness  chemotherapy a previous injury previous exposure to extremely cold temperatures, if you have Raynaud's disease Illness, injury or cold temperatures can interrupt nail growth and cause nail grooves to form at the base of the nails. These grooves tend to only be noticed a few months later, when the nails have grown and the grooves have moved up the nails to become visible. It takes about four to six months for a fingernail to fully grow out, and 6-12 months for a toenail. Unusually curved fingertips and nails Clubbing of the fingertips means the tissue beneath the nails thickens and the fingertips become rounded and bulbous. The fingernails curve over the rounded fingertips. Clubbing is thought to result from increased blood flow to the fingertips. It can run in families and be entirely harmless. However, if it suddenly develops, it may be a sign of one of many possible medical conditions, including: long-term lung disease or heart disease, such as lung cancer, bronchiectasis, or endocarditis inflammatory bowel disease, a long-term disease that causes inflammation of the lining of the gut stomach cancer or bowel cancer cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) polycythaemia, a condition where the blood is too thick  White lines running across nails White spots or streaks are normal and nothing to worry about, but parallel white lines that extend all the way across the nails, known as Muehrcke's lines, are a sign of low levels of protein in the blood. In contrast to Beau's lines (see above), they're not grooved. They can be due to liver disease or malnutrition. Dark stripes running down the nail If you have dark skin, it's fairly common to find dark stripes running down your nails (linear melanonychia). This occurs in more than 77% of black people over the age of 20, and in most cases is perfectly normal. However, it's not something to ignore: dark stripes may sometimes be a form of skin cancer that affects the nail bed, called subungual melanoma. It's important that your doctor checks it to rule out melanoma. Generally, subungual melanoma only affects one nail. Also, it will cause the stripe to change in appearance (for example, it may become wider or darker over time) and the pigmentation may also affect the surrounding skin (the nail fold). Red or brown little streaks under the nails If you have what look like red or brown little streaks underneath the nails, it's likely these are splinter haemorrhages \u2013 lines of blood caused by tiny damaged blood vessels. Just a few splinters under one nail are nothing to worry about and most likely due to injury of the nail. However, if many nails are affected, these splinters may be a sign of lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, an infection of the heart valves (endocarditis) or another underlying disease. A destroyed nail Nails can be destroyed by: injury, including nail biting skin diseases such as psoriasis or lichen planus overgrowth of the surrounding tissues, which is usually harmless (for example, due to a wart or verruca) but can sometimes be cancerous nail patella syndrome \u2013 an uncommon genetic condition which may cause missing nails, usually at birth  If one of your nails becomes destroyed and you don't remember injuring it, it's important to see your GP. Painful, red and swollen nail fold (paronychia) Paronychia is the name for inflammation of the nail fold, which is the skin and soft tissue that frames and supports the nail. This is most often caused by infection, injury or irritation. It's about three times more common in women than in men. Sometimes, there's an underlying skin condition such as eczema or psoriasis or another medical condition such as diabetes or HIV. Paronychia can be acute, where it develops over a few hours, or chronic, where it lasts more than six weeks. Acute paronychia Acute infective paronychia usually starts after a minor injury to the nail fold, such as from nail biting, picking or manicures. The affected area is red, warm, tender and swollen. After a while pus may be seen, which can form around the nail and may lift the nail. Acute paronychia is often caused by Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, although any number of germs can be involved. Treatment is with antibiotic creams or tablets. If there's a large amount of pus, it can help to have this surgically drained. Sometimes, acute paronychia is caused by the cold sore virus, in which case it's known as herpetic whitlow. Acute paronychia can completely clear in a few days with treatment, but if it's not treated or doesn't respond to treatment, it can become long-term (chronic). Chronic paronychia Chronic paronychia may start more gradually and be more difficult to get rid of. It's most common in people who often have their hands in water or chemicals, such as cleaners, bartenders, canteen staff or fishmongers. It may start in one nail fold but can affect several fingers. The affected nail folds are swollen and may be red and sore from time to time, often after exposure to water. The nail plate gradually becomes thickened and ridged as it grows, and may become yellow or green and brittle. The skin in chronic paronychia is often colonised by a mixture of yeasts and bacteria. These germs thrive on previously damaged skin, without necessarily starting the skin damage in the first place. To settle chronic paronychia, both the skin damage and the colonisation with germs needs to be addressed. It can take months for chronic paronychia to clear, and after that up to a year for nails to grow back to normal. You may find that doing things such as keeping your hands dry and warm, frequently using emollient hand cream and avoiding biting and picking your nails can help.  See your GP if the condition is severe. Depending on the type of paronychia, creams and\/or tablets may be prescribed. Use these as directed. You may be referred to a dermatologist for further investigation of the underlying skin disease or for contact allergy testing, and for treatment advice. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1191 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 663  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 277  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 143  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the nail abnormalities information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/nail_abnormalities_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Foot health Nail patella syndrome Fungal nail infection Ingrown toenail External links DermNet NZ: pictures of nail disease Getting help from the podiatrist Taking care of your feet is essential. Here's how podiatrists and chiropodists can help Footcare services for older people If you're having trouble with tasks such as cutting your toenails, local footcare services can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Fungal nail infection","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Fungal-nail-infection","content":"Fungal nail infection - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Fungal nail infection  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Fungal-nail-infection Community Fungal-nail-infection Clinical trials Fungal-nail-infection Fungal nail infection Fungal-nail-infection Treatment   Many people develop a fungal nail infection at some point in their life. It's not usually serious, but can be unpleasant and difficult to treat. The infection develops slowly and causes the nail to become discoloured, thickened and distorted. Toenails are more frequently affected than the fingernails. The medical name for a fungal nail infection is onychomycosis. This page covers: Symptoms Causes Treatments Prevention Symptoms of a fungal nail infection A fungal nail infection may not cause any obvious symptoms at first. As it progresses, the infection can cause: discolouration of the nail \u2013 it may turn white, black, yellow or green thickening and distortion of the nail \u2013 it may become an unusual shape or texture and be difficult to trim pain or discomfort \u2013 particularly when using or placing pressure on the affected toe or finger brittle or crumbly nails \u2013 pieces may break off and come away completely Sometimes the skin nearby may also become infected and be itchy and cracked or red and swollen. Causes of fungal nail infections Most fungal nail infections occur as a result of the fungi that cause athlete's foot infecting the nails. These fungi often live harmlessly on your skin, but they can sometimes multiply and lead to infections. The fungi prefer warm, dark and moist places like the feet. You're more likely to get a fungal nail infection if you: don't keep your feet clean and dry wear shoes that cause your feet to get hot and sweaty walk around barefoot in places where fungal infections can spread easily, such as communal showers, locker rooms and gyms have damaged your nails have a weakened immune system have certain other health conditions, such as diabetes, psoriasis or peripheral arterial disease  Fungal nail infections can be spread to other people, so you should take steps to avoid this (see below) if you have an infection. Treatments for fungal nail infections Treatment isn't always needed for a mild fungal nail infection because it's unlikely to cause any further problems and you may feel it's not worth treating. Whether you decide to have treatment or not, you should still practise good foot hygiene (see below) to stop the infection getting worse or spreading to others. Speak to your GP or pharmacist if you're bothered by the appearance of the affected nail, or it's causing problems such as pain and discomfort. They'll probably recommend: antifungal tablets \u2013 tablets taken once or twice a day for several months antifungal nail paints \u2013 special paints applied directly to the nail over several months nail softening kits \u2013 where a paste is used to soften infected parts of the nail, before they're removed with a scraping device A procedure to remove the nail completely may be recommended in severe cases. Laser treatment, where a high-energy laser is used to destroy the fungus, is also an option. But this is only available privately and can be expensive. Read more about treating a fungal nail infection. Preventing fungal nail infections You can reduce your risk of developing a fungal nail infection by: keeping your hands and feet clean and dry wearing well-fitting shoes made of natural materials and clean cotton socks \u2013 these will allow your feet to \"breathe\" clipping your nails to keep them short \u2013 don't share clippers or scissors with other people not sharing towels and socks with other people, and ensure your towels are washed regularly not walking around barefoot in public pools, showers, and locker rooms \u2013 special shower shoes are available to protect your feet replacing old footwear that could be contaminated with fungi treating athlete's foot as soon as possible to avoid the infection spreading to your nails Nail salon equipment can sometimes be the source of fungal nail infections. If you regularly visit a salon, make sure any equipment used is properly sterilised between uses. Page last reviewed: 22\/09\/2015 Next review due: 22\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 659 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 303  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the nail abnormalities information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/nail_abnormalities_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Antifungal medicines Athlete's foot Find podiatrist and chiropodist services Foot health Nail abnormalities External links British Association of Dermatologists: fungal infections of the nails (PDF, 270kb) The College of Podiatry: athlete's foot Foot health How to keep your feet healthy and choose the right sports shoes, plus what to do if you have smelly feet Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ingrown toenail","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ingrown-toenail","content":"Ingrown toenail - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ingrown toenail  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ingrown-toenail Clinical trials Ingrown toenail Introduction  An ingrown toenail develops when the sides of the toenail grow into the surrounding skin. The big toe is often affected, either on one or both sides. The nail curls and pierces the skin, which becomes red, swollen and tender. Other possible symptoms include: pain if pressure is placed on the toe inflammation of the skin at the end of the toe a build-up of fluid (oedema) in the area surrounding the toe an overgrowth of skin around the affected toe (hypertrophy) bleeding white or yellow pus coming from the affected area When to see your GP See your GP or podiatrist (foot care specialist) if your ingrown toenail is badly inflamed, bleeding or has pus coming from it, because it may be infected. Find a podiatrist in your local area. It's also important to seek medical advice if you have diabetes and an ingrown toenail. Having diabetes could affect how your toenail heals. Read more about foot care and diabetes. What causes ingrown toenails? A number of things can cause an ingrown toenail to develop, including: badly cut toenails \u2013 cutting your toenails too short, or cutting the edges, will encourage the skin to fold over your nail and the nail to grow into the skin wearing tight-fitting shoes, socks or tights \u2013 this places pressure on the skin around your toenail; the skin may be pierced if it's pressed on to your toenail sweaty feet \u2013 if the skin around your toenails is soft, it's easier for your nail to pierce it and embed itself within it injury \u2013 for example, stubbing your toe can sometimes cause an ingrown toenail to develop natural shape of the nail \u2013 the sides of curved or fan-shaped toenails are more likely to press into the skin surrounding the nail A fungal nail infection can cause your toenail to thicken or widen. Treating ingrown toenails Left untreated, an ingrown toenail can become infected, so it\u2019s important that you: keep your feet clean by washing them regularly with soap and water change your socks regularly cut your toenails straight across to stop them digging into the surrounding skin gently push the skin away from the nail using a cotton bud (this may be easier after using a small amount of olive oil to soften the skin) wear comfortable shoes that fit properly Surgery may be recommended if your toenail doesn't improve. Depending on the severity of your symptoms, this may involve removing part or all of your toenail. Partial nail avulsion Partial nail avulsion removes part of your toenail and is the most commonly used operation for treating ingrown toenails. It's about 98% effective. A local anaesthetic is used to numb your toe and the edges of your toenail are cut away. A chemical called phenol is applied to the affected area to prevent the nail growing back and becoming ingrown in the future. A course of antibiotics may be prescribed if your nail is infected, and any pus will be drained away. Total nail avulsion Total nail avulsion completely removes your toenail. This may be necessary if your nail is thick and pressing into the skin surrounding your toe. After you toenail has been removed, you\u2019ll have an indentation where your nail used to be. However, it's perfectly safe for you not to have a toenail. After surgery After toenail surgery, your toe will be wrapped in a sterile bandage. This will help stem any bleeding and prevent infection. Rest your foot and keep it raised for one to two days after the operation. To help reduce the pain, you may need to take a painkiller, such as paracetamol, and wear soft or open-toed shoes for the first few days after surgery. Preventing ingrown toenails Taking care of your feet will help prevent foot problems such as ingrown toenails. It\u2019s important to cut your toenails properly (straight across, not at an angle or down the edges). Wash your feet every day, dry them thoroughly and use foot moisturiser. You can also use a foot file or pumice stone to remove hard or dead skin. Wearing shoes that fit properly will help to ensure your feet remain healthy. You should also change your socks (or tights) every day. Visit your GP or a podiatrist as soon as possible if you develop problems with your feet. Page last reviewed: 24\/11\/2014 Next review due: 24\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 940 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 490  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 212  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 142  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Athlete's foot Bunion Corns and calluses Fungal nail infection Smelly feet External links The College of Podiatry: ingrowing toenails Foot health How to keep your feet healthy and choose the right sports shoes, plus what to do if you have smelly feet Getting help from the podiatrist Taking care of your feet is essential. Here's how podiatrists and chiropodists can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nail patella syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nail-patella-syndrome","content":"Nail patella syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nail patella syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview nail-patella-syndrome Clinical trials Nail patella syndrome Introduction  Nail patella syndrome is a rare genetic condition that can cause problems with the nails, bones, kidneys and eyes. It's thought to affect at least one in 50,000 people. Symptoms vary, but almost everyone with the condition will have abnormal nails and many also have problems with their elbows, knees and pelvis. However, most people are able to lead relatively normal lives. Typical features The main signs and symptoms of nail patella syndrome are listed below. Someone with the condition may not have all these symptoms and some symptoms may be more severe than others. Some of the problems will be obvious from birth, but others may not become apparent until later on. Nail abnormalities Nearly all people with nail patella syndrome will have abnormal or missing nails, which is usually apparent at birth. The base of each nail is often triangular, rather than a curved crescent shape, and the nails themselves may be underdeveloped, discoloured, split, ridged or pitted.  Thumbnails are the most severely affected, and the nails are less severely affected from the index finger towards the little finger. Toenails are generally less affected than fingernails. Other features Other areas of the body that can be affected include the bones and joints, kidneys and eyes. Common features include: knees \u2013 missing kneecaps (patellas) or kneecaps that are small, irregularly shaped and easily dislocated (may feel unstable or painful) arms and elbows \u2013 not able to fully extend the arms or turn the palms up while keeping elbows straight, and elbows may angle outwards  pelvis \u2013 bony growths (iliac horns) on the pelvic bone may be visible on X-rays, but don't usually cause problems eyes \u2013 increased pressure within the eyes (glaucoma) at an early age kidneys \u2013 there may be protein in the urine (an early sign of kidney problems) and this can be accompanied by blood in the urine; in some cases, this can progress to kidney disease, with high blood pressure and kidney failure nerves \u2013 numbness and a tingling or burning sensation in the hands and feet circulation \u2013 poor blood circulation in the hands and feet, causing them to feel cold, even in warm weather digestive system \u2013 about one in three people have constipation or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) body size \u2013 difficulty putting on weight, particularly muscle, despite eating and exercising well, with little muscle mass in the upper arms and upper legs thin bones (osteoporosis) \u2013 notably in the hips hairline \u2013 the hairline may be high, particularly at the temples It has also been suggested that people with nail patella syndrome may be more likely to have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or depression, although more research is needed to confirm this. What causes nail patella syndrome? Most people with nail patella syndrome will have inherited a defective version of a gene called LMX1B from one of their parents. This gene is important in the development of a baby's limbs, nails, kidneys and eyes. Only one of the two copies of the gene needs to be faulty for a person to be affected (dominant inheritance). This means a child of someone with nail patella syndrome has a 50% chance of inheriting the condition. However, there is not always a family history of nail patella syndrome. In some cases, the LMX1B gene will have mutated (altered) spontaneously.  Read more about how genetic conditions are inherited. Genetic testing The diagnosis of nail patella syndrome is usually based on the symptoms you or your child has. However, when the diagnosis is not clear, a genetic blood test can be used to confirm the diagnosis by finding out whether a person is carrying a mutated LMX1B gene. A mutation in this gene can be identified in 95% of people with nail patella syndrome.  Genetic testing can also be carried out during pregnancy to find out if a child will be born with nail patella syndrome, although this cannot predict how severe the condition will be. Another option for couples at risk of having a child with nail patella syndrome is a technique called pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). This involves testing embryos that have been fertilised using in vitro fertilisation (IVF), and only implanting embryos that have not inherited nail patella syndrome into the womb. Before genetic testing or PGD, genetic counselling will be offered. This service is provided by healthcare professionals specially trained in the science of human genetics (a genetic counsellor or a clinical geneticist) and is available at regional genetics centres across the country. The counsellor will discuss the risks, benefits and limitations of genetic testing. They will also explain how the information found as a result of genetic testing could have implications for both you and your family. Read more about genetic testing and counselling. Managing nail patella syndrome There is no cure for nail patella syndrome, but treatments are available to manage the symptoms. For example, knees that are easily dislocated and painful can be helped with painkillers, physiotherapy, splinting and bracing. However, long-term use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) painkillers should be avoided, because these can affect the kidneys. Some people may need corrective surgery for problems with the bones and joints. Annual urine tests to look for kidney problems should begin at birth. If problems develop, these may need to be controlled with medication or dialysis (where a machine is used to replicate many of the kidney\u2019s functions). People with severe kidney disease may need to have a kidney transplant. Women with high blood pressure caused by kidney problems will need to be carefully monitored if they become pregnant, as pregnancy can make high blood pressure worse. Screening for glaucoma should start in the teenage years and be repeated at least every two years. Treatment for glaucoma may involve using eye drops or having a procedure to reduce the pressure inside the eye. Read more about testing for glaucoma and treating glaucoma. Assessment of bone density is recommended for young adults to check for osteoporosis. Read more about testing for osteoporosis. Information about you If you or your child has nail patella syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about you\/them on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 10\/02\/2015 Next review due: 10\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 39 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Genetics Glaucoma Kidney disease Nail abnormalities External links Nail Patella Syndrome UK Contact a Family: Nail patella syndrome Genetics Find out how you inherit your physical and behavioural characteristics, plus learn about testing for genetic conditions Kidney health Find out about how to look after your kidneys and whether you need to have them checked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nappy rash","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/nappies.aspx","content":"How to change your baby's nappy - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: How to change your baby's nappy Video Player Search Enter a search term: Add question Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. How do I change a dirty nappy? Media last reviewed: 20\/03\/2014 Next review due: 20\/03\/2017 How to change a nappy Babies need frequent nappy changes, but how often they need changing depends on how sensitive their skin is. Some babies have very delicate skin and need changing as soon as they wet themselves, otherwise their skin becomes sore and red. Other babies can wait to be changed until before or after every feed. All babies need changing as soon as possible when they've done a poo (stool) to prevent nappy rash. Young babies need changing as many as 10 or 12 times a day, while older babies need to be changed at least six to eight times. What you need for nappy changing Before you change your baby's nappy, wash your hands and get everything you need in one place, including: a changing mat or towel cotton wool and a bowl of warm water or fragrance and alcohol-free baby wipes a plastic bag or bucket for the dirty nappy and dirty cotton wool or wipes barrier cream to protect your baby's skin a clean nappy (and liner and cover if you're using cloth nappies) clean clothes Where to change a nappy The best place to change a nappy is on a changing mat or towel on the floor, particularly if you have more than one baby. That way, if you need to see to another child for a moment, your baby can't fall. It's best done sitting down so you don't hurt your back. If you're using a changing table, keep an eye on your baby at all times. You shouldn't rely on the straps to keep your baby secure. Never walk away or turn your back. Older babies may try to wriggle away when you're changing them. You could give them a toy or use a mobile to distract them. Changing a nappy It's just as important to clean your baby fully whether they have wet themselves or done a poo. If your baby's nappy is dirty, use the nappy to clean off most of the poo from your baby's bottom. Then use the cotton wool and plain warm water (or baby wipes) to remove the rest and get your baby really clean. Clean the whole nappy area gently but thoroughly and make sure you clean inside the folds of skin. Girls should be cleaned from front to back to avoid getting germs into their vagina. Boys should be cleaned around the testicles (balls) and penis, but there's no need to pull back their foreskin. If it's warm enough, let your baby lie on the changing mat without a nappy on for a while. Wearing a nappy all the time makes nappy rash more likely. If you're using disposable nappies, take care not to get water or cream on the sticky tabs as they won't stick if you do. If you're using cloth nappies, put in a nappy liner and then fasten the nappy. Adjust it to fit snugly round the waist and legs. Chat to your baby while you're changing them. Pulling faces, smiling and laughing with your baby will help you bond and help their development. Try not to show any disgust at what's in their nappy. You don't want your baby to learn that doing a poo is something unpleasant or negative. Nappy hygiene Disposable nappies can be rolled up and resealed, using the tabs. Put them in a plastic bag kept only for nappies, then tie it up and put it in an outside bin. Washable cloth nappies don't have to be soaked before they're washed, but you may choose to soak them to help get the stains off. Check the washing instructions first. Cloth nappies can be machine washed at 60C, or you could use a local nappy laundry service. There's no evidence that using washing powders with enzymes (bio powders) or fabric conditioners will irritate your baby's skin. Wash nappies that are dirty with poo separately from your other washing. You'll probably have enough nappies to make up a full load anyway. To avoid infection, wash your hands after changing a nappy before you do anything else. If your baby is old enough, they can wash their hands with you as it's a good habit to get into. What baby poo looks like Your baby's first poo is called meconium. This is sticky and greenish-black. Some babies may do this kind of poo during or after birth, or some time in the first 48 hours. After a few days the poo will change to a yellow or mustard colour. Breastfed babies' poo is runny and doesn't smell. Formula-fed babies' poo is firmer, darker brown and more smelly. Some infant formulas can also make your baby's poo dark green. If you change from breast to formula feeding, you'll find your baby's poos become darker and more paste-like. If you have a girl, you may see a white discharge on her nappy for a few days after birth. It's caused by hormones that have crossed the placenta to your baby, but these will soon disappear from her system. These hormones can occasionally cause slight bleeding like a mini period, but in both cases it's nothing to worry about. Read the NCT guide to newborn baby poo to find out more. How often should my baby do a poo? Babies do an average of four poos a day in the first week of life, and this goes down to an average of two a day by the time they are one year old. Newborn babies who are breastfed may poo at each feed in the early weeks, then, after about six weeks, not have a poo for several days. Formula-fed babies may poo up to five times a day when newborn, but after a few months this can go down to once a day. It's also normal for babies to strain or even cry when doing a poo. Your baby isn't constipated as long as their poos are soft, even if they haven't done one for a few days. Is it normal for my baby's poos to change? From day to day or week to week, your baby's poos will probably vary. If you notice a definite change of any kind, such as the poos becoming very smelly, very watery or harder \u2013 particularly if there's blood in them \u2013 you should talk to your doctor or health visitor. If your baby's poos look pale, this can be a sign of liver disease. Speak to your health visitor or GP if you notice this. Disposable and washable cloth (reusable) nappies Disposable and cloth nappies come in a range of shapes and sizes. The choice might be confusing at first, but with trial and error you will be able to work out which nappies suit your baby best as they grow. Disposable and cloth nappies have different pros and cons, so you will need to consider things like cost, convenience and the impact on the environment when you choose what to buy. For example, disposable nappies are very handy, but washable cloth nappies work out cheaper if you add up the costs over the years your baby is in nappies. Some cloth nappy brands and local councils offer free samples for you to try out. If you use cloth nappies, you may want to sign up to a nappy laundry service that will take away the dirty nappies and deliver a fresh batch each week. Which? has more information to help you decide which type of nappy is best for your baby, budget and lifestyle. Page last reviewed: 01\/10\/2015 Next review due: 01\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 166 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the baby rashes information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/baby_rashes_a_visual_guide.html Related articles Nappy rash Washing and bathing your baby   External links Go Real: the real nappy information service NCT: guide to newborn baby poo Which? choosing a nappy Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy and baby guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Narcolepsy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Narcolepsy","content":"Narcolepsy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Narcolepsy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Narcolepsy Clinical trials Narcolepsy Narcolepsy Symptoms Narcolepsy Causes Narcolepsy Diagnosis Narcolepsy Treatment   Narcolepsy is a rare long-term brain disorder that causes a person to suddenly fall asleep at inappropriate times. The brain is unable to regulate sleeping and waking patterns normally, which can result in: excessive daytime sleepiness \u2013 feeling very drowsy throughout the day, and having difficulty concentrating and staying awake sleep attacks \u2013 falling asleep suddenly and without warning cataplexy \u2013 temporary loss of muscle control resulting in weakness and possible collapse, often in response to emotions such as laughter and anger sleep paralysis \u2013 a temporary inability to move or speak when waking up or falling asleep excessive dreaming and waking in the night \u2013 dreams often come as you fall asleep (hypnogogic hallucinations) or just before or during waking (hypnopompic hallucinations) Narcolepsy doesn't cause serious or long-term physical health problems, but it can have a significant impact on daily life and be difficult to cope with emotionally. Read more about the symptoms of narcolepsy. What causes narcolepsy? Many cases of narcolepsy are caused by a lack of the brain chemical hypocretin (also known as orexin), which regulates wakefulness. The lack of hypocretin is thought to occur because the immune system mistakenly attacks the cells that produce it or the receptors that allow it to work. However, this doesn't explain all cases of narcolepsy, and the exact cause of the problem is often unclear. Things that have been suggested as possible triggers of narcolepsy include: hormonal changes, which can occur during puberty or the menopause major psychological stress an infection, such as swine flu, or the medication used to vaccinate against it (Pandermix)  Read more about the causes of narcolepsy. Who's affected? Narcolepsy is a fairly rare condition. It's difficult to know exactly how many people have narcolepsy because many cases are thought to go unreported. However, it's estimated the condition affects at least 25,000 people in the UK. Men and women are thought to be affected equally by narcolepsy, although some studies have suggested the condition may be more common in men. The symptoms often begin during adolescence, although the condition is usually diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 40. Diagnosing narcolepsy Make an appointment to see your GP if you think you may have narcolepsy. They may ask about your sleeping habits and any other symptoms you have. They may also carry out tests to help rule out other conditions that could be causing your excessive daytime sleepiness, such as sleep apnoea, restless legs in bed and kicking during sleep, or an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism). If necessary, you'll be referred to a specialist in sleep disorders, who will analyse your sleep patterns. This will usually involve staying overnight in a specialist sleep centre so various aspects of your sleep can be monitored. Read more about diagnosing narcolepsy. Treating narcolepsy There's currently no cure for narcolepsy, but making changes to improve your sleeping habits and taking medication can help minimise the impact the condition has on your daily life. Taking frequent, brief naps evenly spaced throughout the day is one of the best ways to manage excessive daytime drowsiness. This may be difficult when you're at work or school, but your GP or specialist may be able to devise a sleep schedule that will help you get into a routine of taking naps. Keeping to a strict bedtime routine can also help, so you should go to bed at the same time each night whenever possible. If your symptoms are particularly troublesome, you may be prescribed medication that can help reduce daytime sleepiness, prevent cataplexy attacks and improve your sleep at night. These medications are usually taken as daily tablets, capsules or drinkable solutions. Read more about treating narcolepsy. Information about you If you or your child has narcolepsy, your clinical team will pass information about you\/them on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Narcolepsy and driving If you're diagnosed with narcolepsy, it may affect your ability to drive. Stop driving immediately and inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA). You'll need to complete a medical questionnaire so your individual circumstances can be assessed. You'll usually be allowed to drive again if your narcolepsy is well controlled and you have regular reviews to assess your condition. GOV.UK has more information about narcolepsy and driving. The Narcolepsy UK website also has more on driving and narcolepsy. Page last reviewed: 29\/04\/2016 Next review due: 29\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 95 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Narcolepsy Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Samantha was 16 when she was diagnosed with narcolepsy, a chronic sleep disorder. She describes the symptoms and how it affects her daily life, and an expert discusses its causes and treatment. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Depression Insomnia Sleep apnoea Sleep paralysis Unexplained daytime sleepiness External links GOV.UK: medical conditions and driving Narcolepsy UK National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS): narcolepsy Do you have sleep apnoea? Snoring can often be a symptom of a more serious sleeping disorder called sleep apnoea Unexplained daytime sleepiness Read about idiopathic hypersomnia, an unexplained condition that causes you to feel very sleepy during the day NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nasal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-nose-and-sinus","content":"Nasal and sinus cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nasal and sinus cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cancer-of-the-nose-and-sinus Clinical trials Nasal and sinus cancer   Nasal and sinus cancer affects the nasal cavity (the space behind your nose) and the sinuses (small, air-filled cavities inside your nose, cheekbones and forehead). It's a rare type of cancer that most often affects men aged 50-60. Nasal and sinus cancer is different to cancer in the area where the nose and throat connect. This is called nasopharyngeal cancer. This page covers: Symptoms When to see your GP Who's at risk Treatments Outlook Symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer The most common symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer are: a persistent blocked nose, which usually only affects one side nosebleeds mucus draining from the nose, which may be blood-stained a decreased sense of smell These symptoms can be similar to more common and less serious conditions, such as a cold or sinusitis. At a later stage, symptoms can include: pain or numbness in the face swollen glands in the neck partial loss of vision or double vision a bulging or persistently watering eye a lump or growth on your face, nose or roof of your mouth When to see your GP See your GP if you notice any unusual or persistent symptoms. They're very unlikely to be caused by nasal or sinus cancer, but are worth getting checked out. If your GP thinks you might need some tests to determine what's causing your symptoms, you'll usually be referred to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) consultant in hospital. Tests you may have include: a nasal endoscopy \u2013 where a long, thin, flexible tube attached to a light source is inserted into your nose to examine the area a computerised tomography (CT) scan and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan a biopsy (where a small sample of tissue is removed and examined) \u2013 this may be done during an endoscopy or using a needle Who's at risk of nasal and sinus cancer Several factors are known to increase the risk of developing nasal and sinus cancer, including: your gender \u2013 men are more likely to develop nasal and sinus cancer than women prolonged exposure to certain substances through your work, including wood dust, leather dust, nickel, chromium and formaldehyde smoking \u2013 the more you smoke, the higher your risk of developing several types of cancer, including nasal and sinus cancer human papilloma virus (HPV) \u2013 a group of viruses that affect the skin and moist membranes, such as the mouth and throat The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) has produced a report on the risk of occupational nasal and sinus cancer in Great Britain (PDF, 2Mb). Treatments for nasal and sinus cancer The best treatment depends on several factors, including how far the cancer has spread and your general health. Treatment may include: surgery to remove a tumour \u2013 which can be performed using surgical incisions (open surgery) or as keyhole surgery through the nose (endoscopic microsurgery) radiotherapy \u2013 where high-energy radiation is used to kill the cancerous cells, shrink a tumour before surgery, or destroy small amounts of a tumour that may be left after surgery chemotherapy \u2013 where medicine is used to help shrink or slow down the growth of a tumour, or to reduce the risk of the cancer returning after surgery Your treatment will be organised by a head and neck cancer multidisciplinary team (MDT), who will discuss the treatment options with you. A combination of treatments will often be recommended. Outlook for nasal and sinus cancer There are many different types of cancer that can affect the nasal cavity and sinuses. The outlook varies, depending on the specific type you have. Overall, around one in every two or three people with nasal and sinus cancer will live for at least five years after diagnosis. However, this can vary, depending on things such as exactly where the cancer is located and how far it has spread before it's diagnosed and treated. Nearly everyone diagnosed at an early stage will live for at least five years. However, if it's not diagnosed until an advanced stage, only around one in every three to five people will live at least five years. Cancer of the nasal cavity generally has a better outlook than cancer of the sinuses. Want to know more? Living with cancer Macmillan: nasal and sinus cancers Cancer Research UK: nasal and paranasal sinus cancer  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 25\/05\/2016 Next review due: 25\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 59 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Nasopharyngeal cancer Head and neck cancer Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links Macmillan: paranasal sinus cancer Cancer Research UK: nasal and paranasal sinus cancer My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Cancer: your test results If you're waiting for your test results, find out how you can prepare for your consultation Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nasal congestion","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Catarrh","content":"Catarrh - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Catarrh  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Catarrh Introduction  Catarrh is a build-up of mucus in an airway or cavity of the body. It usually affects the back of the nose, the throat or the sinuses (air-filled cavities in the bones of the face). It's often temporary, but some people experience it for months or years. This is known as chronic catarrh. Catarrh can be a nuisance and may be difficult to get rid of, but it's not harmful and there are treatments available. This page covers: Symptoms associated with catarrh Treatments for catarrh When to see your GP What causes catarrh? Symptoms associated with catarrh Catarrh can lead to a: constant need to clear your throat feeling that your throat is blocked blocked or stuffy nose that you can't clear runny nose feeling of mucus running down the back of your throat persistent cough headache or facial pain reduced sense of smell and taste crackling sensation in your ear and some temporary hearing loss These problems can be frustrating to live with and may affect your sleep, making you feel tired. Treatments for catarrh Catarrh will often pass in a few days or weeks as the condition that causes it improves. See What causes catarrh? below for more information. There are things you can try at home to relieve your symptoms, such as: avoiding things that trigger your symptoms, such as allergens or smoky places taking sips of cold water when you feel the need to clear your throat \u2013 constantly clearing your throat may make things worse using a saline nasal rinse several times a day \u2013 these can be bought from a pharmacy or made at home with half a teaspoon of salt in a pint of boiled water that's been left to cool avoiding warm, dry atmospheres, such as places with air conditioning and car heating systems \u2013 placing plants or bowls of water in a room may help to keep the air humid staying well hydrated talking to a pharmacist about suitable over-the-counter medications \u2013 including decongestants, antihistamines or steroid nasal sprays There are also several remedies, such as herbal medicines, available from health shops and pharmacies that claim to treat catarrh. Some people find these helpful, but there's generally little scientific evidence to suggest they work. When to see your GP Speak to your GP if your catarrh persists and is becoming difficult to live with. They may want to rule out conditions that could be causing it, such as nasal polyps or allergies. This may mean you need to be referred to a specialist for tests. If you're diagnosed with a specific underlying condition, treating it may help relieve your catarrh. For example, nasal polyps may be treated with a steroid nasal spray, or in some cases surgery.  Read more about treating nasal polyps. If a cause for you catarrh cannot be found, the self-help techniques above may be recommended. Unfortunately, however, chronic catarrh can be hard to treat and may last for a long time. What causes catarrh? Catarrh is usually caused by the immune system reacting to an infection or irritation, which causes the lining of your nose and throat to become swollen and produce mucus. This can be triggered by: a cold or other infections hay fever or other types of allergic rhinitis non-allergic rhinitis nasal polyps It's unclear what causes chronic catarrh, but it's not thought to be the result of an allergy or infection. It may be related to an abnormality in the way mucus travels within the nose or an increased sensitivity to mucus in the back of the nose and throat. Page last reviewed: 17\/02\/2016 Next review due: 17\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 887 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 241  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 233  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 166  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Allergic rhinitis Common cold Decongestants Nasal polyps Non-allergic rhinitis External links Allergy UK ENT UK: patient information Colds and flu The difference between a cold and flu, remedies and who needs to have the flu jab Hay fever All you need to know about hay fever and its treatment, plus lots of self-help tips Find and choose services for Catarrh Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cold","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cold-common","content":"Common cold - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Common cold  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cold-common Clinical trials Common cold Cold-common Symptoms Cold-common Treatment Cold-common Complications Cold-common Children Introduction  A cold is a mild viral infection of the nose, throat, sinuses and upper airways. It's very common and usually clears up on its own within a week or two. The main symptoms of a cold include: a sore throat a blocked or runny nose sneezing a cough More severe symptoms, including a high temperature (fever), headache and aching muscles can also occur, although these tend to be associated more with flu. Read more about the symptoms of a cold. What to do There's no cure for a cold, but you can look after yourself at home by: resting, drinking plenty of fluids and eating healthily taking over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, to reduce any fever or discomfort using decongestant sprays or tablets to relieve a blocked nose trying remedies such as gargling salt water and sucking on menthol sweets Many painkillers and decongestants are available from pharmacies without a prescription. They're generally safe for older children and adults to take, but might not be suitable for babies, young children, pregnant women, people with certain underlying health conditions, and those taking certain other medications. Speak to a pharmacist if you're unsure. Read more about treating colds and colds in younger children. When to see your GP If you or your child has a cold, there's usually no need to see your GP as it should clear within a week or two. You only really need to contact your GP if: your symptoms persist for more than three weeks your symptoms get suddenly worse you have breathing difficulties you develop complications of a cold, such as chest pain or coughing up bloodstained mucus It might also be a good idea to see your GP if you're concerned about your baby or an elderly person, or if you have a long-term illness such as a lung condition. You can also phone NHS 111 for advice. How do colds spread?  In general, a person becomes contagious from a few days before their symptoms begin until all of their symptoms have gone. This means most people will be infectious for around two weeks. You can catch the virus from an infectious person by: touching an object or surface contaminated by infected droplets and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes touching the skin of someone who has the infected droplets on their skin and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes inhaling tiny droplets of fluid that contain the cold virus \u2013 these are launched into the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes Colds spread most easily among groups of people in constant close contact, such as families and children in school or day care facilities. They're also more frequent during the winter, although it's not clear exactly why. A number of different viruses can cause a cold, so it's possible to have several colds one after the other, as each one may be caused by a different virus. How can I stop a cold spreading? You can take some simple steps to help prevent the spread of a cold. For example: wash your hands regularly, particularly before touching your nose or mouth and before handling food always sneeze and cough into tissues \u2013 this will help prevent the virus-containing droplets from your nose and mouth entering the air, where they can infect others; you should throw away used tissues immediately and wash your hands  clean surfaces regularly to keep them free of germs  use your own cup, plates, cutlery and kitchen utensils don't share towels or toys with someone who has a cold It's been suggested that vitamin C, zinc  and garlic supplements may help reduce your risk of getting a cold, but there's currently not enough strong evidence to support this. Read more about preventing colds and flu. Page last reviewed: 30\/04\/2015 Next review due: 30\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1161 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 594  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 237  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 194  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Colds and flu Spotting signs of serious illness in your child Winter health External links Treat Yourself Better Five ways to stay healthy this winter It may be cold outside, but winter needn't be the unhealthiest time of year for you and your family Cough Find out about the main causes of a cough, when to seek medical advice, and what treatments are available Colds and flu The difference between a cold and flu, remedies and who needs to have the flu jab NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Decongestant medication","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Decongestant-drugs","content":"Decongestants - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Decongestants  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Decongestant-drugs Clinical trials Decongestants Introduction   Decongestants are a type of medicine that can provide short-term relief for a blocked or stuffy nose (nasal congestion). They can help ease the symptoms of conditions such as colds and flu, hay fever and other allergic reactions, and sinusitis. They work by reducing the swelling of the blood vessels in your nose, which helps open up the airways. This page covers: Types of decongestants Who can take decongestants How to use decongestants Side effects of decongestants Interactions with other medications Types of decongestants Decongestants are available as: nasal sprays tablets or capsules liquids or syrups flavoured powders to dissolve in hot water Some products may just contain decongestant medication, but many are sold as \"all in one\" remedies that contain decongestants, painkillers and\/or antihistamines. Most decongestants can be bought over the counter from pharmacies without a prescription. Who can take decongestants Most people can use decongestants safely, but they're not suitable for everyone. They shouldn't be used by the following groups of people without getting advice from a pharmacist or GP first: babies and children \u2013 decongestants shouldn't be given to children under six years old and should only be used by children aged 6-12 on the advice of a GP or pharmacist pregnant and breastfeeding women \u2013 it's not clear whether it's safe to take decongestants if you're pregnant or breastfeeding, so you should only use them if advised by a healthcare professional people taking other medications (see Interactions with other medications below) people with diabetes people with high blood pressure people with an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) men with an enlarged prostate people with liver, kidney, heart or circulation problems people with glaucoma (increased pressure in the eye) The patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine will state who shouldn't use it and who should seek advice before using it. How to use decongestants Most decongestants should only be used three or four times a day. Check the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine for advice about how much to take and how often to take it. If you're unsure, ask a pharmacist for advice. Decongestant nasal sprays shouldn't be used for more than a week at a time because using them for too long can make your stuffiness worse. Speak to your GP if your symptoms fail to improve after this time. Side effects of decongestants Decongestant medicines don't usually have side effects, and any side effects you may experience are usually mild. Possible side effects can include: irritation of the lining of your nose headaches feeling or being sick a dry mouth feeling restless or agitated a rash uncontrollable shaking (tremor) problems sleeping (insomnia) a rapid and\/or irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia) noticeable heartbeats (palpitations) in men, difficulty passing urine These side effects should pass after you stop taking the medication. More serious side effects can also occur, such as hallucinations and severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis), but these are very rare. Interactions with other medications Seek advice from a pharmacist or GP before taking decongestants if you're taking other medications. Decongestants can increase or decrease the effect of some other medications. For example, taking decongestants alongside a type of antidepressant called a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) can cause a dangerous rise in blood pressure. It's also important to be wary of taking other medications if you're using an \"all in one\" decongestant remedy. These products contain additional painkillers and\/or antihistamines, so it could be dangerous to take extra separate doses of these medicines at the same time. Page last reviewed: 03\/03\/2016 Next review due: 03\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 219 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Allergies Common cold Hayfever Pharmacy and medicines External links Yellow Card Scheme: report a side effect Pharmacy and medicines Using your local pharmacy's services could save you an unnecessary trip to your GP Cold comfort Find out how to look after yourself if you get a cough, cold or flu, and when you need to see a doctor NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Flu","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Flu","content":"Flu - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Flu  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Flu Clinical trials Seasonal flu Flu Symptoms Flu Treatment Flu Complications Flu Prevention Introduction  Flu is a common infectious viral illness spread by coughs and sneezes. It can be very unpleasant, but you'll usually begin to feel better within about a week. You can catch flu \u2013 short for influenza \u2013 all year round, but it's especially common in winter, which is why it's also known as \"seasonal flu\". It's not the same as the common cold. Flu is caused by a different group of viruses and the symptoms tend to start more suddenly, be more severe and last longer. Some of the main symptoms of flu include: a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above tiredness and weakness a headache general aches and pains a dry, chesty cough Cold-like symptoms \u2013 such as a blocked or runny nose, sneezing, and a sore throat \u2013 can also be caused by flu, but they tend to be less severe than the other symptoms you have. Flu can make you feel so exhausted and unwell that you have to stay in bed and rest until you feel better. Read more about the symptoms of flu. What to do If you're otherwise fit and healthy, there's usually no need to see a doctor if you have flu-like symptoms. The best remedy is to rest at home, keep warm and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration. You can take paracetamol or ibuprofen to lower a high temperature and relieve aches if necessary. Stay off work or school until you're feeling better. For most people, this will take about a week. Read more about treating flu at home. When to see your GP Consider visiting your GP if: you're 65 years of age or over you're pregnant you have a long-term medical condition \u2013 such as diabetes, heart disease, lung disease, kidney disease or a neurological disease you have a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, because you're having chemotherapy or have HIV you develop chest pain, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, or start coughing up blood your symptoms are getting worse over time or haven't improved after a week In these situations, you may need medication to treat or prevent complications of flu. Your doctor may recommend taking antiviral medicine to reduce your symptoms and help you recover more quickly. Read more about antiviral medication for flu. How long does flu last and is it serious? If you have flu, you generally start to feel ill within a few days of being infected. You should begin to feel much better within a week or so, although you may feel tired for much longer. You will usually be most infectious from the day your symptoms start and for a further three to seven days. Children and people with weaker immune systems may remain infectious for longer. Most people will make a full recovery and won't experience any further problems, but elderly people and people with certain long-term medical conditions are more likely to have a bad case of flu or develop a serious complication, such as a chest infection. Read more about the complications of flu. How you catch flu The flu virus is contained in the millions of tiny droplets that come out of the nose and mouth when someone who is infected coughs or sneezes. These droplets typically spread about one metre. They hang suspended in the air for a while before landing on surfaces, where the virus can survive for up to 24 hours. Anyone who breathes in the droplets can catch flu. You can also catch the virus by touching the surfaces that the droplets have landed on if you pick up the virus on your hands and then touch your nose or mouth. Everyday items at home and in public places can easily become contaminated with the flu virus, including food, door handles, remote controls, handrails, telephone handsets and computer keyboards. Therefore, it's important to wash your hands frequently. You can catch flu many times, because flu viruses change regularly and your body won't have natural resistance to the new versions. Preventing the spread of flu You can help stop yourself catching flu or spreading it to others with good hygiene measures. Always wash your hands regularly with soap and warm water, as well as: regularly cleaning surfaces such as your computer keyboard, telephone and door handles to get rid of germs using tissues to cover your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze putting used tissues in a bin as soon as possible You can also help stop the spread of flu by avoiding unnecessary contact with other people while you're infectious. You should stay off work or school until you're feeling better. In some people at risk of more serious flu, an annual flu vaccine (see below) or antiviral medication may be recommended to help reduce the risk of becoming infected. Read more about how to stop the spread of flu. The flu vaccine A flu vaccine is available for free on the NHS for: anyone over the age of 65  pregnant women anyone who is very overweight (with a body mass index over 40) children and adults with an underlying health condition (particularly long-term heart or lung disease) children and adults with weakened immune systems An annual flu vaccine nasal spray is also now offered to healthy children aged two, three and four years old, and to children in school years one and two.  The best time to have the vaccine is in the autumn, between September and early November. If you think you might need it, contact your local GP surgery. You should have the flu vaccination every year so you stay protected, as the viruses that cause flu change every year. For more information on who should have the flu vaccine and how to get it, read the sections on the flu jab for adults, the flu jab for pregnant women and the children's flu vaccine. Other types of flu As well as seasonal flu, there are several other types of flu. These include: bird (avian) flu \u2013 a type of flu spread among birds that affects humans in rare cases swine flu \u2013 the type of flu that was responsible for the flu pandemic in 2009-10 \"gastric flu\" (gastroenteritis) \u2013 an infection of the digestive system, which can be caused by bacteria or viruses such as the norovirus Click on the links above for more information about these types of flu. Page last reviewed: 01\/04\/2015 Next review due: 01\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 966 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 490  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 226  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 144  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cold or flu? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Do you know the difference between a cold and flu? An expert explains the conditions, treatments and remedies available. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Bird flu The common cold Seasonal flu jab Swine flu External links PHE: which flu vaccine should you or your child have? NICE: antivirals to treat flu NICE: antivirals to prevent flu Treat Yourself Better Winter health Tips and advice on how to stay healthy and well through the cold, dark days of winter The flu jab Flu is highly infectious \u2013 but the annual flu jab can help prevent it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nasal polyps","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Polyps-nose","content":"Nasal polyps - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nasal polyps  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Polyps-nose Clinical trials Nasal polyps Polyps-nose Treatment Introduction  Nasal polyps are swellings of the normal nasal lining that occur inside the nasal passages and sinuses (air-filled spaces behind the nose, eyes and cheeks). They are typically pearly in colour and can vary in size. Each polyp is teardrop-shaped, and can look like a grape when fully grown. You may not always know if you have nasal polyps because they can be difficult to see and don't always cause any symptoms. What problems can they cause? Nasal polyps usually only cause problems if they are large or grow in clusters. Symptoms can include: a blocked nose, which can make it difficult to breathe through your nose a runny nose mucus that drips from the back of your nose down your throat (post-nasal drip) a reduced sense of smell or taste a feeling of fullness or pressure in the face snoring obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) \u2013  your airways become temporarily blocked while you're asleep, which can disturb your sleep If polyps block your sinuses, they can cause a build-up of fluid that may become infected (sinusitis). If this happens, you may have facial pain, toothache and a high temperature (fever). When to see your GP The symptoms of nasal polyps can be very similar to those of more common conditions, such as a cold. However, colds tend to clear up within a few days, whereas nasal polyps usually won't get better unless they're treated. You should see your GP if you have nasal symptoms that last a month or more. What causes nasal polyps? Nasal polyps are thought to develop as a result of inflammation of the lining of the nasal passages and sinuses. The lining becomes increasingly swollen and then hangs down. It's unclear exactly what triggers this inflammation, although certain things can increase your risk of developing nasal polyps, including: asthma \u2013 20-40% of people with nasal polyps also have asthma aspirin intolerance \u2013 allergy-like symptoms, such as a watery nose, occur if you take aspirin or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen Nasal polyps usually affect adults and are more common in men than women. They're rare in children. Diagnosing nasal polyps Your GP will ask you about your symptoms and examine the inside of your nose. Further tests carried out at the ear, nose and throat (ENT) department of your local hospital will often be needed to confirm polyps and to determine how large they are and how many you have. This will usually involve an endoscopy (where a small tube with a camera at one end is inserted up your nostril) or a computerised tomography (CT) scan. Treating nasal polyps Nasal polyps can be difficult to get rid of permanently, but steroid medication can often help shrink them, and surgery to remove them can be carried out if medication doesn't help. The main treatments are: corticosteroid nose drops or nasal sprays to shrink the polyps over a number of weeks or months corticosteroid tablets to shrink larger or more troublesome polyps quickly, although they're not usually used for more than 10 days because of the risk of side effects surgery to remove large or persistent polyps using tiny surgical instruments inserted up your nostrils As polyps can grow back after treatment, including after surgery, you will usually be advised to continue using corticosteroid nasal sprays to help stop them returning quickly. Read more about how nasal polyps are treated. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/02\/2015 Next review due: 12\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 553 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 313  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 135  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful The sinuses JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Corticosteroids Cystic fibrosis Having surgery Sinusitis External links ENT UK: nasal polyps Cold or flu? Find out about symptoms of colds and flu and how to stop the viruses spreading Living with asthma Information on diagnosing, treating and living with asthma, as well as what to do during an asthma attack NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nasopharyngeal cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nasopharyngeal-cancer","content":"Nasopharyngeal cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nasopharyngeal cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview nasopharyngeal-cancer Clinical trials nasopharyngeal-cancer Community Nasopharyngeal cancer   Nasopharyngeal cancer is a rare type of cancer that affects the part of the throat connecting the back of the nose to the back of the mouth (the pharynx). In the UK, only about 240 people are diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer each year. Nasopharyngeal cancer shouldn't be confused with other types of cancer that also affect the throat, such as laryngeal cancer and oesophageal cancer. Symptoms of nasopharyngeal cancer It's often difficult to recognise nasopharyngeal cancer because the symptoms are similar to other, less serious conditions. Also, many people with nasopharyngeal cancer don't have any symptoms until the cancer reaches an advanced stage. Symptoms of nasopharyngeal cancer can include: a lump in the neck hearing loss \u2013 usually only in one ear tinnitus \u2013 hearing sounds that come from inside the body rather than from an outside source a blocked or stuffy nose nosebleeds See your GP if you develop any worrying symptoms, particularly if they don't improve after a few weeks. While they're very unlikely to be caused by nasopharyngeal cancer, it's best to get them checked out. What causes nasopharyngeal cancer? The exact cause of nasopharyngeal cancer is unknown, but a number of factors can increase your risk of developing the condition. These include: being of south Chinese or north African descent having a diet very high in salt-cured meats and fish being exposed to the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a common virus that causes glandular fever having a job where you're regularly exposed to hardwood dust having a first-degree relative, such as a parent, who's had the condition Being exposed to the human papilloma virus (HPV) may also increase your risk of developing certain types of nasopharyngeal cancer. About three times as many men as women are affected by nasopharyngeal cancer, and the average age at diagnosis is about 50. Diagnosing nasopharyngeal cancer If you see your GP with symptoms that could indicate nasopharyngeal cancer, they'll usually ask about your symptoms and carry out some examinations. This may involve examining your throat using a small mirror and a light. If your GP thinks further tests are necessary, they'll refer you to hospital. At hospital, a number of different tests may be carried out to check for nasopharyngeal cancer and rule out other conditions. Some of the tests you may have include: a nasendoscopy \u2013 where a thin, flexible telescope (endoscope) is inserted up your nose and passed down your throat to look for any abnormalities; it's carried out while you're awake, but local anaesthetic can be used to numb your nose and throat imaging scans \u2013 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans or computerised tomography (CT) scans can be used to check for tumours and determine whether the cancer has spread a panendoscopy \u2013 a more detailed examination of your nose and throat carried out under general anaesthetic (where you're unconscious) using a series of small, rigid telescopes connected together a biopsy \u2013 where a small tissue sample is removed during a panendoscopy so it can be examined in a laboratory Once these tests are complete, your doctors will be able to confirm whether you have nasopharyngeal cancer. They'll also be able to \"stage\" the cancer, which means giving it a score to describe how large it is and how far it has spread. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the stages of nasopharyngeal cancer. How nasopharyngeal cancer is treated If you're diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer, you'll be cared for by a team of different specialists who work together called a multidisciplinary team (MDT). Members of your MDT will discuss with you what they think the best treatment option is in your case. The two main treatments for nasopharyngeal cancer are: radiotherapy \u2013 where radiation is used to kill cancer cells chemotherapy \u2013 where medication is used to kill cancer cells In most cases, a combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy will be used. Surgery isn't usually used to treat nasopharyngeal cancer as it's difficult for surgeons to access the affected area. Radiotherapy Radiotherapy is the most commonly used treatment for nasopharyngeal cancer. It can be used on its own to treat very early-stage cancers, or in combination with chemotherapy for more advanced cancers. In most cases, external radiotherapy is used. This involves using a machine to focus high-energy radiation beams on to the area that requires treatment. In nasopharyngeal cancer, an advanced form of external radiotherapy called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is used. It involves aiming radiation beams of different strengths at a tumour from several different angles. This helps maximise the dose delivered to the tumour, while minimising the effect on the surrounding healthy tissue. Stereotactic radiotherapy is another way of giving radiotherapy externally and may be used to target a specific area where the cancer has returned. External radiotherapy is often given in short sessions, once a day from Monday to Friday, with a break at weekends. This is usually carried out for up to seven weeks. You won't need to stay in hospital overnight between these appointments. In some cases, internal radiotherapy may be required where nasopharyngeal cancer has returned after initial treatment. A radioactive source is placed into or near the cancerous area and left in place for anywhere from a few minutes to a few days. Depending on the type of treatment you have, you may need to stay in hospital for a short period of time. Radiotherapy itself is painless, but it can have some significant side effects, such as: red and sore skin in the treatment area feeling sick changes to your sense of taste dry mouth  hair loss These side effects are usually temporary, but some can be permanent. Let your care team know if you experience these problems as treatment is often available to help. Read more about how radiotherapy is performed and the side effects of radiotherapy. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy may be used before or alongside radiotherapy for more advanced nasopharyngeal cancers. It's usually given through a drip into a vein (intravenous chemotherapy), with sessions every three to four weeks spread over several months. You won't usually need to stay in hospital overnight during treatment. Like radiotherapy, chemotherapy can cause a number of significant side effects, such as: feeling sick diarrhoea sore mouth tiredness These side effects are usually temporary, but there's also a risk of longer-term problems, such as infertility. You should discuss any concerns you have about the potential side effects of treatment with your care team before treatment begins. Read more about how chemotherapy is performed and the side effects of chemotherapy. Follow-up After your course of treatment ends, you'll need to have regular follow-up appointments and scans to monitor your recovery and check for any signs of the cancer returning. To start with, these appointments will be every few weeks or months, but they'll become gradually less frequent over time. Outlook The outlook for nasopharyngeal cancer depends on your age, general health and how advanced the condition is when you're diagnosed. Radiotherapy alone can cure many very early-stage nasopharyngeal cancers, but many cases are diagnosed at a more advanced stage as the condition doesn't always cause obvious symptoms until later on. More advanced cancers are treated with a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. They're often curable if the cancer hasn't spread beyond the head and neck region. Overall, about 50 out of every 100 people (50%) diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer will live for five years or more after diagnosis. Survival rates are better for younger people, but worse for older people. Around 70 out of 100 (70%) people under 45 years of age, and 35 out of 100 (35%) people aged 65 to 74, will live for five years or more after being diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer. You can read more about the statistics and outlook for nasopharyngeal cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. Further reading You can read more about nasopharyngeal cancer on the Cancer Research UK website. Macmillan is another good source of information and advice about nasopharyngeal cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/10\/2015 Next review due: 12\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 31 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Cancer treatment: what happens during radiotherapy? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. See what happens during radiotherapy treatment. An expert describes what happens and advises what questions to ask if you're referred for radiotherapy. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Find cancer support services Head and neck cancer Laryngeal cancer Nasal and sinus cancer External links Cancer Research UK: nasopharyngeal cancer Macmillan: nasopharyngeal cancer Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Life after cancer Get advice on adjusting to life after cancer, including how to cope with fatigue, changes to your body and difficult emotions, and where to go for further help and support NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Natural family planning","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/natural-family-planning.aspx","content":"Natural family planning: fertility awareness - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Natural family planning (fertility awareness) A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is natural family planning. At a glance: facts about natural family planning   How it works   Who can use it   Advantages and disadvantages   Lactational amenorrhoea method (LAM) Natural family planning is a method that teaches you at what time during the month you can have sex without contraception and with a reduced risk of pregnancy. The method is sometimes called fertility awareness. It works by plotting the times of the month when you\u2019re fertile and when you\u2019re not. You learn how to record fertility signals, such as your body temperature and cervical secretions (fluids or mucus), to identify when it\u2019s safer to have sex. Natural family planning is more effective when more than one fertility signal is monitored. You can't learn natural family planning from a book. It has to be learned from a specialist teacher. At a glance: facts about natural family planning If the instructions are properly followed, natural family planning methods can be up to 99% effective, depending on what methods are used. This means that one woman in 100 who use natural family planning will get pregnant in one year. It will be less effective if it's not used according to the instructions \u2013 estimates suggest that it may only be around 75% effective because of mistakes. There are no physical side effects, and you can use it to plan when you get pregnant.  You have to keep a daily record of your fertility signals, such as your temperature and the fluids coming from your cervix \u2013 it takes three to six menstrual (monthly) cycles to learn the method. Your fertility signals can be affected by factors such as illness, stress and travel. If you want to have sex during the time when you might get pregnant, you need to use a condom, diaphragm or cap. By using condoms as well as natural family planning, you'll help to protect yourself against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). How natural family planning works How it prevents pregnancy Your menstrual cycle  The temperature method Cervical secretion monitoring method Combining fertility awareness methods How effective natural family planning is How it prevents pregnancy The aim of natural family planning is to prevent pregnancy by avoiding sex, or using barrier methods of contraception, during the woman's fertile time. Natural family planning involves using your body's signs and symptoms to assess if you're currently fertile and likely to get pregnant if you have sex. It is important that you are taught natural family planning by a suitably qualified teacher. You can check the availability of instructors in your local area by visiting the Fertility UK website. The information in this section is designed to serve as an overview only. It is not a substitute for proper instruction and training. There are three different fertility indicators you can use in combination to increase the effectiveness of natural family planning. These are: daily readings of your body temperature changes to your cervix \u2013 specifically, the secretions of mucus from your cervix the length of your menstrual cycle These are discussed in more detail below. Your menstrual cycle Your menstrual cycle lasts from the first day of your period until the day before your next period starts. The length of a woman\u2019s menstrual cycle can vary. Anything from 24 to 35 days is common, although it could be longer or shorter than this. The average length of the menstrual cycle is 28 days.  Ovulation During your menstrual cycle: hormones are released to stimulate your ovaries a tiny egg stored in one of your ovaries begins to grow and mature when the egg is mature, it\u2019s released from your ovary (a process called ovulation) and travels down the fallopian tube Occasionally a second egg is released, within 24 hours of the first egg. Ovulation occurs roughly halfway through your menstrual cycle, usually around 10 to 16 days before the start of your next period. Ovulation could happen earlier or later than this, depending on the length of your cycle. When calculating your fertile time, you need to take into account the uncertainty over exactly when you ovulate. For pregnancy to happen, a sperm needs to meet the egg to fertilise it. Sperm can live in a woman's body for up to seven days after sex. As the length of a menstrual cycle can vary over time, to make sure your calculations are as precise as possible, you will need to measure your menstrual cycle over the course of 12 months. Calculating the length of your cycle is not a reliable way of working out your fertile time and should not be used on its own as a fertility indicator. The temperature method The temperature method is based on the fact that there is a small rise in body temperature after ovulation takes place. You will need to use either a digital thermometer or a thermometer specifically designed for natural family planning. These are available from pharmacies. Ear or forehead thermometers are not accurate enough to be used in this way. The temperature method involves: Taking your temperature every morning before you get out of bed. This should be done before eating or drinking anything, before smoking and ideally at the same time every morning.  Look out for three days in a row when your temperature is higher than all of the previous six days. The increase in temperature is very small, usually around 0.2C (0.4F). It is likely that you are no longer fertile at this time. Cervical secretion monitoring method There is a change in the amount and consistency of the mucus secreted from your cervix during different times in your menstrual cycle. You can check this by gently placing your middle finger into your vagina and pushing it up to around your middle knuckle. For the first few days after your period, you will probably find that your vagina is dry and you cannot feel any mucus. As the levels of hormones rise to prepare your body for ovulation, you will probably find that your cervix is now producing mucus that is: moist and sticky white and creamy This is the start of the fertile period of your menstrual cycle. Immediately before ovulation the mucus will get: wetter clearer slippery, a bit like raw egg white This is when you are at your most fertile. The mucus should then soon return to being thicker and sticky, and after three days you should no longer be fertile. Combining fertility awareness methods It is best to combine all three methods to give you a more accurate picture of when you are likely to be most fertile. You can use fertility charts to record information from all three methods, which you can then track over the course of each menstrual cycle. You can download fertility charts from the Fertility Education and Training site, with information on how to use them. There are also apps you can download for smartphones or software for your computer that allow you to track this information. How effective natural family planning is If natural family planning methods are used according to instructions, they can be up to 99% effective. This means that one out of 100 women using natural family planning correctly will get pregnant. It takes commitment and practice to use natural family planning this effectively. Taking into account the fact that people can make mistakes, forget instructions or that other problems can occur, some estimates suggest that, in reality, natural family planning can be around 75% effective. This means that 25 out of 100 women using natural family planning may get pregnant. If you decide to use natural family planning, you can reduce your risk of accidental pregnancy by making sure you are taught natural family planning by a suitably qualified teacher, and then making sure you follow their instructions and advice. Who can use natural family planning Most women are able to use natural family planning. However, there are some circumstances where it is not recommended as a form of contraception, or as your only form of contraception. You might want to consider a different method if:   you have a medical condition that makes becoming pregnant dangerous \u2013 such as poorly controlled high blood pressure or heart disease there could potentially be a health risk to the baby if you got pregnant \u2013 for example, if you are dependent on drugs or alcohol, or taking medications known to cause birth defects   you are having irregular periods, so predicting your fertile time may be hard or impossible; irregular periods can have a wide range of causes, such as age, stress, rapid weight gain or weight loss, excessive exercise and having an overactive thyroid gland you have a temporary condition that is disrupting the normal signs of fertility, such as pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), a sexually transmitted infection (STI) or bacterial vaginosis; you would have to wait until the infection passed before using natural family planning you have a long-term condition (or other underlying factors) that is disrupting the normal signs of fertility, such as liver disease, an over or underactive thyroid gland, cervical cancer or polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS); find out more about things that affect your fertility signs you are taking a medication known to disrupt the normal production of cervical mucus, making fertility awareness methods difficult to use \u2013 this can include lithium (used to treat a number of serious mental health conditions, such as bipolar disorder) and some older types of antidepressants  you have an increased risk of catching an STI \u2013 for example, you have multiple sexual partners Things that affect your fertility signs Some factors can disrupt normal fertility signs, for example if you:  have irregular periods  have recently stopped taking hormonal contraception  have recently had a miscarriage or an abortion  have recently given birth and are breastfeeding  regularly travel through different time zones  have an infection in your vagina such as thrush or an STI Other factors that affect your body's natural signs include: altering how and when you take your temperature drinking alcohol  taking certain medication  illness some long-term conditions Advantages and disadvantages of natural family planning Advantages It does not cause any side effects.  Natural family planning is acceptable to all faiths and cultures. Most women can use natural family planning, providing they are properly trained by a teacher in fertility awareness, and keep accurate records.  Once you have learned the techniques, there should be no further need for input from health professionals.  Natural family planning can be used to avoid pregnancy or to become pregnant, according to your wishes.  It does not involve chemicals or physical products.  It can help you recognise normal and abnormal vaginal secretions, so you can be aware of possible infection. It involves your partner in the process, which can help increase feelings of closeness and trust.  Disadvantages Natural family planning does not protect against STIs such as chlamydia or HIV. You will need to avoid sex, or use contraception such as condoms, during the time you might get pregnant, which some couples can find difficult.  If you do decide to abstain, there can sometimes be up to 16 days during which you cannot have sex, depending on your cycle. It can be much less effective than other methods of contraception. Depending on how accurately it is used, as many as one in four women using natural family planning may get pregnant. It will not work without the continuing commitment and co-operation of both you and your partner. It can take several menstrual cycles before you become confident in identifying your fertile time. During this time, you will have to use barrier contraception, such as condoms. You will need to keep a daily record of your fertility signs. It is not suitable if you have persistent irregular periods. Factors such as stress, illness, travel, lifestyle and use of hormonal treatments can disrupt your fertility signs. This includes oral emergency contraception. If you use the emergency contraceptive pill, you will need to wait for two complete cycles before relying on natural family planning again. Lactational amenorrhoea method (LAM) Women don't have periods while they're breastfeeding (this is known as lactational amenorrhoea), so breastfeeding can be used as a form of contraception. This is known as the lactational amenorrhoea method (LAM). The fertility signals used in natural family planning methods are not reliable in women who are breastfeeding. Women who are fully (or nearly fully) breastfeeding can use the LAM for the first six months after their baby is born, as long as:  the woman has complete amenorrhoea (no periods at all) she's fully or very nearly fully breastfeeding (this means that the baby is having breastmilk only, and very little or no formula) the baby is less than six months old When used correctly and consistently, one in 200 women who use LAM will get pregnant in the first six months. However, take care to use the method correctly. Don't feed your baby other foods because this may reduce your lactation. LAM becomes unreliable when:  other foods or liquids are substituted for breastmilk  your baby reaches six months old After having a baby, it is possible to get pregnant before your periods start again. This is because you ovulate around two weeks before your period. For more information on breastfeeding, LAM and other reliable methods of contraception, talk to your health visitor, midwife or doctor. You can also read about breastfeeding in the pregnancy and baby guide.  Where to get contraception Most types of contraception are available free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people's services (call the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123 for more information) Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacists won't tell your parents or carer as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Page last reviewed: 29\/12\/2014 Next review due: 29\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 78 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Female condoms Male condoms Contraceptive diaphragm Contraceptive cap External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Fertility UK Natural Family Planning Teachers' Association Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Hospital Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Contraception","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/contraception-guide","content":"Contraception - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Your contraception guide Welcome to the contraception guide \"Where can I get contraception?\" \"Which method of contraception suits me?\" \"I'm under 16 \u2013 can I get contraception?\" Whatever questions you have about getting and using contraception, this guide can help. It aims to give practical information to everyone who wants to know more about contraception, including teenagers; women in their 20s, 30s and 40s; and anyone with a question about the method they use or are thinking about using. You can find out about the 15 methods that are available on the NHS, together with where to get them and how to decide which method might work best for you. Finding your way around If you're viewing on a computer screen, use the big green tabs at the top of the page to see a full menu for each section of the contraception guide. If you can't find what you are after, try the search box at the top of the page \u2013 it covers everything on the NHS Choices site. If you're viewing this on a mobile device, click the blue tab called \"Sections\" at the top of the page, and you'll see a list of all the topics covered in this guide. When you are on a page you like, be sure to check out the useful links and videos on the right-hand side. Popular subjects and pages You can start by finding out about the methods of contraception you can choose from, including how they work, who can use them and possible side effects. These methods are:  caps combined pill condoms (female) condoms (male) contraceptive implant contraceptive injection contraceptive patch diaphragms intrauterine device (IUD) intrauterine system (IUS) natural family planning progestogen-only pill vaginal ring There are two permanent methods of contraception: female sterilisation male sterilisation (vasectomy) You can also find out about: how effective contraception is, and how effective emergency contraception is Deciding which method suits you Which method works best for you depends on a number of factors, including your age, whether you smoke, your medical and family history, and any medication you're taking. Find out what you need to think about in Which method suits me? Where you can get contraception and emergency contraception Contraception is free on the NHS. Find out where to get contraception, and search by postcode to find: GPs near you  sexual health clinics near you  pharmacies near you  You can also find out where to get emergency contraception \u2013 the \"morning after pill\" or the IUD (coil). Common questions about contraception Get answers to some common questions about getting and using contraception, including: what to do if you're on the pill and you're sick or have diarrhoea using contraception after having a baby when your periods will come back after stopping the pill whether you can get a sterilisation reversal on the NHS Page last reviewed: 02\/02\/2015 Next review due: 02\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 286 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 160  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Services near you Find and compare services Services GP Hospital Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Contraception clinics Find out what information and services you can expect from a contraception clinic External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for under 25s NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/morning-sickness-nausea.aspx","content":"Morning sickness - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Nausea and morning sickness Video Player Search Enter a search term: Add question Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. How can I cope with morning sickness? Media last reviewed: 20\/03\/2014 Next review due: 20\/03\/2017 Vomiting and sickness in pregnancy Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, also known as morning sickness, is very common in early pregnancy. It's unpleasant, but it doesn't put your baby at any increased risk and usually clears up by weeks 16 to 20 of pregnancy. Some women get a very severe form of nausea and vomiting called hyperemesis gravidarum (HG), which can be very serious. It needs specialist treatment, sometimes in hospital. Find out more about hyperemesis gravidarum. With morning sickness, some women are sick (vomit) and some have a feeling of sickness (nausea) without being sick. The term \"morning sickness\" is misleading. It can affect you at any time of the day or night, and some women feel sick all day long. It's thought hormonal changes in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy are probably one of the causes of morning sickness. Symptoms should ease as your pregnancy progresses. In some women, symptoms disappear by the third month of pregnancy. However, some women experience nausea and vomiting for longer than this, and about 1 woman in 10 continues to feel sick after week 20. How common is morning sickness? During early pregnancy, nausea, vomiting and tiredness are common symptoms. Around half of all pregnant women experience vomiting, and more than 80% of women (80 out of 100) experience nausea in the first 12 weeks.  People sometimes consider morning sickness a minor inconvenience of pregnancy, but for some women it can have a significant adverse effect on their day-to-day activities and quality of life. Treatments for morning sickness If you have morning sickness, your GP or midwife will initially recommend that you try a number of changes to your diet and daily life to help reduce your symptoms. These include: getting plenty of rest \u2013 tiredness can make nausea worse if you feel sick first thing in the morning, give yourself time to get up slowly \u2013 if possible, eat something like dry toast or a plain biscuit before you get up drinking plenty of fluids, such as water, and sipping them little and often rather than in large amounts, as this may help prevent vomiting eating small, frequent meals that are high in carbohydrate (such as bread, rice and pasta) and low in fat \u2013 most women can manage savoury foods, such as toast, crackers and crispbread, better than sweet or spicy foods eating small amounts of food often rather than several large meals \u2013 but don't stop eating eating cold meals rather than hot ones as they don't give off the smell that hot meals often do, which may make you feel sick avoiding foods or smells that make you feel sick avoiding drinks that are cold, tart (sharp) or sweet asking the people close to you for extra support and help \u2013 it helps if someone else can cook, but if this isn't possible, go for bland, non-greasy foods, such as baked potatoes or pasta, which are simple to prepare distracting yourself as much as you can \u2013 the nausea can get worse the more you think about it wearing comfortable clothes without tight waistbands If you have severe morning sickness, your doctor or midwife might recommend medication. Anti-sickness remedies If your nausea and vomiting is severe and doesn't improve after you make changes to your diet and lifestyle, your GP may recommend a short-term course of an anti-sickness medicine that is safe to use in pregnancy. This type of medicine is called an antiemetic. The commonly prescribed antiemetics can have side effects. These are rare, but can include muscle twitching. Some antihistamines (medicines often used to treat allergies such as hay fever) also work as antiemetics. Your doctor might prescribe an antihistamine that is safe to take in pregnancy. See your GP if you would like to consider this form of treatment. Ginger eases morning sickness There is some evidence that ginger supplements may help reduce nausea and vomiting. To date, there have not been any reports of adverse effects being caused by taking ginger during pregnancy. However, ginger products are unlicensed in the UK, so buy them from a reputable source, such as a pharmacy or supermarket. Check with your pharmacist before you use ginger supplements. Some women find that ginger biscuits or ginger ale can help reduce nausea. You can try different things to see what works for you. Find out more about vitamins and supplements in pregnancy.  Acupressure might help morning sickness Acupressure on the wrist may also be effective in reducing symptoms of nausea in pregnancy. Acupressure involves wearing a special band or bracelet on your forearm. Some researchers have suggested that putting pressure on certain parts of the body may cause the brain to release certain chemicals that help reduce nausea and vomiting. There have been no reports of any serious adverse effects caused by using acupressure during pregnancy, although some women have experienced numbness, pain and swelling in their hands. When to see a doctor for morning sickness If you are vomiting and can't keep any food or drink down, there is a chance that you could become dehydrated or malnourished. Contact your GP or midwife immediately if you: have very dark-coloured urine or do not pass urine for more than eight hours are unable to keep food or fluids down for 24 hours feel severely weak, dizzy or faint when standing up have abdominal (tummy) pain have a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above vomit blood Urinary tract infections (UTIs) can also cause nausea and vomiting. A UTI is an infection that usually affects the bladder but can spread to the kidneys. If you have any pain when passing urine or you pass any blood, you may have a urine infection and this will need treatment. Drink plenty of water to dilute your urine and reduce pain. You should contact your GP within 24 hours. Risk factors for morning sickness A number of different factors may mean you are more likely to have nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. These include: nausea and vomiting in a previous pregnancy a family history of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, or morning sickness a history of motion sickness \u2013 for example, in a car a history of nausea while using contraceptives that contain oestrogen obesity \u2013 where you have a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or more stress multiple pregnancies, such as twins or triplets first pregnancy Page last reviewed: 12\/02\/2015 Next review due: 12\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 538 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 311  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 126  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts 'I vomited 30 times a day in pregnancy' Caitlin Dean tells how she coped with hyperemesis gravidarum Severe vomiting in pregnancy Severe vomiting in pregnancy (hyperemesis gravidarum) may need hospital treatment Services near you Find and compare services Services Antenatal classes Antenatal support services GP Hospital Maternity services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Related articles Antenatal care  Common pregnancy problems Foods to avoid Your options for where to give birth External links Pregnancy Sickness Support Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked Morning sickness (NVP) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy (NVP) is an unwelcome but perfectly normal part of being pregnant. A midwife describes the symptoms and how you can relieve them, while a group of mothers share their experiences. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy and baby guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neck pain","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neck-pain","content":"Neck pain and stiff neck - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neck pain and stiff neck  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neck-pain Clinical trials Neck pain Introduction  Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. The pain and stiffness usually gets better after a few days or weeks, and is rarely a sign of a more serious problem. You can get a painful or stiff neck if you sleep in an awkward position, use a computer for a prolonged period of time, or strain a muscle because of bad posture. Anxiety and stress can also sometimes cause tension in your neck muscles, which can lead to pain in your neck. You can normally manage your symptoms at home by following the advice below. Managing neck pain at home For most of the types of neck pain described above, the advice is generally the same: carry on with your normal daily activities, keep active, and take painkillers to relieve the symptoms. You can also take these steps to manage your pain: take regular doses of paracetamol, ibuprofen, or a combination of the two, to control pain \u2013 ibuprofen gel can be rubbed on to your neck as an alternative to taking tablets (always follow the instructions that come with the medication) try holding a hot water bottle or heat pack to your neck \u2013 this can help reduce the pain and any muscle spasms, although some people find cold packs offer better relief sleep on a low, firm pillow at night \u2013 using too many pillows may force your neck to bend unnaturally check your posture \u2013 bad posture can aggravate the pain, and it may have caused it in the first place avoid wearing a neck collar \u2013 there is no evidence to suggest wearing a neck collar will help to heal your neck, and it's generally better to keep your neck mobile avoid driving if you find it difficult to turn your head \u2013 this may prevent you being able to view traffic if your neck is stiff or twisted, try some neck exercises \u2013 gently tense your neck muscles as you tilt your head up and down and from side to side, and as you carefully twist your neck from left to right; these exercises will help strengthen your neck muscles and improve your range of movement You can find more information about neck exercises on the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy website. When to see your GP See your GP if the pain or stiffness does not improve after a few days or weeks, if you cannot control the pain using ordinary painkillers, or if you are worried your neck pain could have a more serious cause. Your GP will examine your neck and ask some questions to help identify any underlying condition. They may also prescribe a stronger painkiller, such as codeine, to take with your usual over-the-counter painkillers. If you have had neck pain or stiffness for a month or more, your GP may be able to refer you to a physiotherapist. If your symptoms are particularly severe or do not improve, your GP may consider prescribing more powerful medication or referring you to a pain specialist for further treatment. Read more about living with pain for further information and advice about persistent pain. What causes neck pain and stiffness? A twisted or locked neck Some people suddenly wake up one morning to find their neck twisted to one side and stuck in that position. This is known as acute torticollis and is caused by injury to the neck muscles. The exact cause of acute torticollis is unknown, but it may be caused by bad posture, sleeping without adequate neck support, or carrying heavy unbalanced loads (for example, carrying a heavy bag with one arm). Acute torticollis can take up to a week to get better, but it usually only lasts 24 to 48 hours. Wear and tear in the neck Sometimes neck pain is caused by the \"wear and tear\" that occurs to the bones and joints in your neck. This is a type of arthritis called cervical spondylosis. Cervical spondylosis occurs naturally with age. It does not always cause symptoms, although in some people the bone changes can cause neck stiffness. Nearby nerves can also be squashed, resulting in pain that radiates from the arms, pins and needles, and numbness in the hands and legs. Most cases will improve with treatment in a few weeks. Whiplash Whiplash is a neck injury caused by a sudden movement of the head forwards, backwards or sideways. It often occurs after a sudden impact such as a road traffic accident. The vigorous movement of the head overstretches and damages the tendons and ligaments in the neck. As well as neck pain and stiffness, whiplash can cause tenderness in the neck muscles, reduced and painful neck movements, and headaches. Pinched nerve Neck pain caused by a squashed nerve is known as cervical radiculopathy. It's usually caused by one of the discs between the bones of the upper spine (vertebrae) splitting open and the gel inside bulging outwards on to a nearby nerve. The condition is more common in older people because your spinal discs start to lose their water content as you get older, making them less flexible and more likely to split. The pain can sometimes be controlled with painkillers and by following the advice below, although surgery may be recommended for some people. More serious causes Your neck pain may have a more serious cause if it's persistent and getting progressively worse, or you have additional symptoms, such as: a lack of co-ordination \u2013 you may find fiddly tasks increasingly difficult problems walking loss of bladder or bowel control a high temperature (fever) unexplained weight loss A serious cause is more likely if you have recently had a significant injury \u2013 for example, you were involved in a car accident or had a fall \u2013 or you have a history of cancer or conditions that weaken your immune system, such as HIV. See your GP if you are concerned. Preventing neck pain You may find the following advice helpful in preventing neck pain: make sure you have good posture when sitting and standing \u2013 read more about how to sit correctly, how to use a laptop safely, and common posture mistakes and fixes take regular breaks from your desk, driving or any activity where your neck is held in the same position for a long period of time if you often feel stressed, try relaxation techniques to help ease any tension in your neck avoid sleeping on your front, and make sure your head is in line with your body (not tilted to the side) if you sleep on your side only use enough pillows (usually only one) to keep your head level with your body   make sure your mattress is relatively firm \u2013 a soft mattress could mean your neck is bent while you sleep Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 10\/12\/2014 Next review due: 10\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2390 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1065  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 688  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 190  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 124  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 323  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Cervical spondylosis Living with pain NHS help for people with pain Shoulder pain Whiplash External links Action on Pain: chronic pain Arthritis Research UK: neck pain Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: neck pain Pain Concern How to sit correctly Prevent back pain and other related pains with these tips on setting up your work station correctly Ways to manage persistent pain If you're in pain, keeping active will help, as well as taking painkillers and doing physiotherapy Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neck stiffness","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Neck-pain","content":"Neck pain and stiff neck - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neck pain and stiff neck  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neck-pain Clinical trials Neck pain Introduction  Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. The pain and stiffness usually gets better after a few days or weeks, and is rarely a sign of a more serious problem. You can get a painful or stiff neck if you sleep in an awkward position, use a computer for a prolonged period of time, or strain a muscle because of bad posture. Anxiety and stress can also sometimes cause tension in your neck muscles, which can lead to pain in your neck. You can normally manage your symptoms at home by following the advice below. Managing neck pain at home For most of the types of neck pain described above, the advice is generally the same: carry on with your normal daily activities, keep active, and take painkillers to relieve the symptoms. You can also take these steps to manage your pain: take regular doses of paracetamol, ibuprofen, or a combination of the two, to control pain \u2013 ibuprofen gel can be rubbed on to your neck as an alternative to taking tablets (always follow the instructions that come with the medication) try holding a hot water bottle or heat pack to your neck \u2013 this can help reduce the pain and any muscle spasms, although some people find cold packs offer better relief sleep on a low, firm pillow at night \u2013 using too many pillows may force your neck to bend unnaturally check your posture \u2013 bad posture can aggravate the pain, and it may have caused it in the first place avoid wearing a neck collar \u2013 there is no evidence to suggest wearing a neck collar will help to heal your neck, and it's generally better to keep your neck mobile avoid driving if you find it difficult to turn your head \u2013 this may prevent you being able to view traffic if your neck is stiff or twisted, try some neck exercises \u2013 gently tense your neck muscles as you tilt your head up and down and from side to side, and as you carefully twist your neck from left to right; these exercises will help strengthen your neck muscles and improve your range of movement You can find more information about neck exercises on the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy website. When to see your GP See your GP if the pain or stiffness does not improve after a few days or weeks, if you cannot control the pain using ordinary painkillers, or if you are worried your neck pain could have a more serious cause. Your GP will examine your neck and ask some questions to help identify any underlying condition. They may also prescribe a stronger painkiller, such as codeine, to take with your usual over-the-counter painkillers. If you have had neck pain or stiffness for a month or more, your GP may be able to refer you to a physiotherapist. If your symptoms are particularly severe or do not improve, your GP may consider prescribing more powerful medication or referring you to a pain specialist for further treatment. Read more about living with pain for further information and advice about persistent pain. What causes neck pain and stiffness? A twisted or locked neck Some people suddenly wake up one morning to find their neck twisted to one side and stuck in that position. This is known as acute torticollis and is caused by injury to the neck muscles. The exact cause of acute torticollis is unknown, but it may be caused by bad posture, sleeping without adequate neck support, or carrying heavy unbalanced loads (for example, carrying a heavy bag with one arm). Acute torticollis can take up to a week to get better, but it usually only lasts 24 to 48 hours. Wear and tear in the neck Sometimes neck pain is caused by the \"wear and tear\" that occurs to the bones and joints in your neck. This is a type of arthritis called cervical spondylosis. Cervical spondylosis occurs naturally with age. It does not always cause symptoms, although in some people the bone changes can cause neck stiffness. Nearby nerves can also be squashed, resulting in pain that radiates from the arms, pins and needles, and numbness in the hands and legs. Most cases will improve with treatment in a few weeks. Whiplash Whiplash is a neck injury caused by a sudden movement of the head forwards, backwards or sideways. It often occurs after a sudden impact such as a road traffic accident. The vigorous movement of the head overstretches and damages the tendons and ligaments in the neck. As well as neck pain and stiffness, whiplash can cause tenderness in the neck muscles, reduced and painful neck movements, and headaches. Pinched nerve Neck pain caused by a squashed nerve is known as cervical radiculopathy. It's usually caused by one of the discs between the bones of the upper spine (vertebrae) splitting open and the gel inside bulging outwards on to a nearby nerve. The condition is more common in older people because your spinal discs start to lose their water content as you get older, making them less flexible and more likely to split. The pain can sometimes be controlled with painkillers and by following the advice below, although surgery may be recommended for some people. More serious causes Your neck pain may have a more serious cause if it's persistent and getting progressively worse, or you have additional symptoms, such as: a lack of co-ordination \u2013 you may find fiddly tasks increasingly difficult problems walking loss of bladder or bowel control a high temperature (fever) unexplained weight loss A serious cause is more likely if you have recently had a significant injury \u2013 for example, you were involved in a car accident or had a fall \u2013 or you have a history of cancer or conditions that weaken your immune system, such as HIV. See your GP if you are concerned. Preventing neck pain You may find the following advice helpful in preventing neck pain: make sure you have good posture when sitting and standing \u2013 read more about how to sit correctly, how to use a laptop safely, and common posture mistakes and fixes take regular breaks from your desk, driving or any activity where your neck is held in the same position for a long period of time if you often feel stressed, try relaxation techniques to help ease any tension in your neck avoid sleeping on your front, and make sure your head is in line with your body (not tilted to the side) if you sleep on your side only use enough pillows (usually only one) to keep your head level with your body   make sure your mattress is relatively firm \u2013 a soft mattress could mean your neck is bent while you sleep Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 10\/12\/2014 Next review due: 10\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2390 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1065  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 688  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 190  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 124  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 323  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Cervical spondylosis Living with pain NHS help for people with pain Shoulder pain Whiplash External links Action on Pain: chronic pain Arthritis Research UK: neck pain Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: neck pain Pain Concern How to sit correctly Prevent back pain and other related pains with these tips on setting up your work station correctly Ways to manage persistent pain If you're in pain, keeping active will help, as well as taking painkillers and doing physiotherapy Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Necrotising fasciitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/necrotising-fasciitis","content":"Necrotising fasciitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Necrotising fasciitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Necrotising fasciitis is a rare but serious bacterial infection that affects the tissue beneath the skin, and surrounding muscles and organs (fascia). It's sometimes called the \"flesh-eating disease\", although the bacteria that cause it don't \"eat\" flesh \u2013 they release toxins that damage nearby tissue. Necrotising fasciitis can start from a relatively minor injury, such as a small cut, but gets worse very quickly and can be life-threatening if it's not recognised and treated early on. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical help Treatments Outlook Causes Prevention Symptoms of necrotising fasciitis The symptoms of necrotising fasciitis develop quickly over hours or days. They may not be obvious at first and can be similar to less serious conditions such as flu, gastroenteritis or cellulitis. Early symptoms can include: a small but painful cut or scratch on the skin intense pain that's out of proportion to any damage to the skin a high temperature (fever) and other flu-like symptoms After a few hours to days, you may develop: swelling and redness in the painful area \u2013 the swelling will usually feel firm to the touch diarrhoea and vomiting dark blotches on the skin that turn into fluid-filled blisters If left untreated, the infection can spread through the body quickly and cause symptoms such as dizziness, weakness and confusion. When to get medical help Necrotising fasciitis is a medical emergency that requires immediate treatment. Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible if you think you have it. Call 999 for an ambulance if you're too unwell to get yourself to A&E. Blood tests and scans may be carried out to find out what's causing your symptoms, although a diagnosis of necrotising fasciitis can usually only be confirmed by having an operation to examine the affected tissue. Treatments for necrotising fasciitis Necrotising fasciitis needs to be treated in hospital. The main treatments are: surgery to remove infected tissue \u2013 this may be repeated several times to ensure all the infected tissue is removed, and occasionally it may be necessary to amputate affected limbs antibiotics \u2013 usually several different types are given directly into a vein supportive treatment \u2013 including treatment to control your blood pressure, fluid levels and organ functions People with the condition will often need to be looked after in an intensive care unit and may need to stay in hospital for several weeks. While in hospital, they may be isolated from other patients to reduce the risk of spreading the infection. Outlook for necrotising fasciitis Necrotising fasciitis can progress very quickly and lead to serious problems such as blood poisoning (sepsis) and organ failure. Even with treatment, it's estimated that one or two in every five cases are fatal. People who survive the infection are sometimes left with long-term disability due to amputation or the removal of a lot of infected tissue. They may need further surgery to improve the appearance of the affected area and may need ongoing rehabilitation support to help them adapt to their disability. Causes of necrotising fasciitis Necrotising fasciitis can be caused by several different types of bacteria. The bacteria that cause the infection live in the gut, in the throat, or on the skin of some people, where they don\u2019t usually cause any serious problems. However, in rare cases, they can cause necrotising fasciitis if they get into deep tissue \u2013 either through the bloodstream, or an injury or wound, such as: cuts and scratches  insect bites  puncture wounds caused by injecting drugs surgical wounds Necrotising fasciitis typically occurs when bacteria already on the skin or in the body get into deep tissue. The infection can also be spread from person to person, but this is very rare. Anyone can get necrotising fasciitis \u2013 including young and otherwise healthy people \u2013 but it tends to affect older people and those in poor general health. Preventing necrotising fasciitis There's no vaccine for necrotising fasciitis and it's not always possible to prevent it. The following measures may help to reduce your risk: Treat wounds quickly \u2013 after stopping any bleeding, clean wounds with running water and pat them dry with a clean towel. Keep wounds clean and dry \u2013 after a wound has been cleaned, cover it with a sterile dressing (such as a plaster); change the dressing if it gets wet or dirty. Wash your hands regularly with soap and warm water \u2013 alcohol-based hand gels can also help, but washing with soap and water is generally best. If you're in close contact with someone who has necrotising fasciitis, you may be given a course of antibiotics to reduce your risk of infection. Page last reviewed: 23\/05\/2016 Next review due: 23\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 5 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Streptococcal infections Cuts and grazes Amputation External links The Lee Spark NF Foundation Cellulitis Find out about cellulitis, an infection of the deeper layers of the skin and underlying tissue Look after your skin Benefit your skin by stopping smoking, plus how to protect your skin against sun damage and more NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neonatal herpes (herpes in a newborn baby)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neonatal-herpes","content":"Neonatal herpes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neonatal herpes (herpes in a baby)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neonatal herpes Introduction  'Neonatal herpes' is a herpes infection in a newborn baby. It's caused by the herpes simplex virus, a highly contagious virus that can cause cold sores and genital ulcers in adults. Herpes can be very serious for a young baby, whose immune system won't have fully developed to fight off the virus. Thankfully, neonatal herpes is rare in the UK and can be prevented by following some simple advice. How does a newborn baby catch herpes? During pregnancy and labour A newborn baby is at risk of catching herpes if the mother had genital herpes for the first time within the last six weeks of her pregnancy. There's a risk the mother will have passed the infection on to her baby if she had a vaginal delivery.  This risk is much lower if the mother has had previous episodes of genital herpes. Learn more about the risks of genital herpes and pregnancy. After birth The herpes simplex virus can also be passed on to a newborn baby if: a person has a cold sore and kisses the baby the mother breastfeeds her baby with herpes sores on her breast (which can develop after touching her cold sore and then her breast) Cold sores are at their most contagious when they burst (rupture), they remain contagious until completely healed. What are the warning signs in babies? Because newborn babies have under-developed immune systems, they can quickly become seriously ill after catching the virus. A newborn baby infected with herpes may: become listless (lacking in energy) and sleepy stop feeding be floppy have a fever (read how to take your baby's temperature) have a high-pitched cry have breathing difficulties or start grunting breath rapidly have a blue tongue and skin (cyanosis) have a rash The baby's health can deteriorate quickly if the virus spreads to their brain or other parts of their body. What should you do if you think your baby has it? Contact your GP or midwife as soon as possible if your baby has any of the above symptoms and you're worried. You may be advised to take your baby to A&E. Find your nearest A&E. Neonatal herpes is usually treated with antiviral drugs given directly into the baby's vein (intravenously). This treatment may be needed for several weeks. Any related complications, such as seizures, will also need to be treated. The baby can be breastfed while receiving treatment, unless the mother has herpes sores around her nipples. If the mother is taking antiviral treatment too, this can be excreted in her breast milk but is not thought to cause any harm to the baby. How serious is herpes for a baby? Sometimes neonatal herpes will only affect the baby's eyes, mouth or skin. In these cases, most babies will make a complete recovery with antiviral treatment. However, the condition is much more serious if it has spread to the baby's organs. Nearly a third of infants with this type of neonatal herpes will die, even after they've been treated. If widespread herpes is not immediately treated, there's a high chance the baby will die.  How can neonatal herpes be prevented? If you're pregnant and have a history of genital herpes, tell your doctor or midwife. You may need to take medication during the last month of pregnancy to prevent an outbreak of vaginal sores during labour. Delivery by caesarean section is recommended if the genital herpes has occurred for the first time in the last six weeks of your pregnancy.  If you develop a cold sore, or think you're coming down with a herpes infection, take these precautions: don't kiss any babies wash your hands before contact with a baby wash your hands before breastfeeding and cover up any cold sores, to avoid accidentally touching your mouth and then breast (this is enough to transfer the virus) Support and advice if you\u2019ve been affected You may find these resources helpful: World Health Organization (WHO) factsheet: herpes simplex virus NHS: cold sores NHS: genital herpes Sands (stillbirth neonatal death charity)   Page last reviewed: 14\/08\/2015 Next review due: 14\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cold sores Genital herpes What are the risks of genital herpes during pregnancy? How to take your baby's temperature External links Sands - stillbirth and neonatal death charity Poster: neonatal herpes (PDF, 6.1 Mb) Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Does your child have a serious illness? Learn the warning signs that your baby or toddler may be seriously ill NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Respiratory-distress-syndrome","content":"Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Respiratory-distress-syndrome Clinical trials Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome Respiratory-distress-syndrome Treatment Respiratory-distress-syndrome Complications Introduction  Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS) happens when a newborn baby's lungs aren't fully developed and they cannot provide enough oxygen. It usually affects premature babies.  NRDS is also known as:  hyaline membrane disease infant respiratory distress syndrome newborn respiratory distress syndrome surfactant deficiency lung disease (SDLD) Despite having a similar name, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) isn't related. ARDS is caused by a serious underlying health condition and can affect people of any age. Why it happens NRDS most often occurs when there isn't enough surfactant in the lungs. This substance, made up of proteins and fats, helps keep the lungs inflated and prevents parts of the lung called air sacs collapsing. A baby normally begins producing surfactant sometime between weeks 24 and 28 of pregnancy. Most babies produce enough surfactant to breathe normally by week 34. If your baby is born prematurely, they may not have enough surfactant in their lungs. Occasionally, NRDS occurs in babies that aren't born prematurely. This is usually caused by other risk factors, such as: the mother having diabetes the baby being underweight poor lung development, which can be caused by a variety of illnesses Problems with the genes can play a role in lung development, but this is very rare. It's estimated half of all babies born before 28 weeks of pregnancy will develop NRDS. However, this has reduced in recent years, as steroid injections can be given to mothers at risk of NRDS during premature labour. Signs and symptoms The signs of NRDS are often noticeable immediately after birth and get worse over the following few days. They can include: blue-coloured lips, fingers and toes rapid, shallow breathing flaring nostrils a grunting sound when breathing As premature babies are usually born in hospital, most babies with NRDS are already in hospital when they develop these problems and receive treatment. If you give birth outside hospital and notice the above symptoms in your child, call 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance. Diagnosing NRDS A number of tests can be used to look for the signs of NRDS and rule out other possible causes. These tests may include: a physical examination blood tests \u2013 to measure the amount of oxygen in the blood and check for an infection a pulse oximetry test \u2013 to measure how much oxygen is being absorbed in the blood, using a sensor attached to the fingertip, ear or toe a chest X-ray \u2013 to look for the distinctive cloudy appearance of NRDS Treating NRDS Most babies with NRDS need breathing help with extra oxygen and possibly some form of ventilator support. Babies needing ventilation can often be treated with a medication directly into the lungs called artificial surfactant, which helps restore normal lung function. Some cases can be prevented or at least made less severe by treating the mother with a medication called betamethasone before birth. Read more about treating NRDS. Complications In the majority of cases NRDS can be treated successfully, and deaths directly linked to NRDS are rare in the UK. However, in more severe cases there's a risk of further problems. These can include scarring to the lungs, leading to longer-term breathing problems. There's also a risk of brain damage, which may result in problems such as learning difficulties. Read more about the possible complications of NRDS. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 39 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) Pregnancy and baby guide Premature labour and birth Special care for premature babies Premature labour Sometimes labour starts early, and your baby may be born prematurely. Find out what to expect Baby special care Find out about special care for babies born early, sick, jaundiced or with a disability Find and choose services for Respiratory distress syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nephrotic syndrome in children","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nephrotic-syndrome","content":"Nephrotic syndrome in children - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nephrotic syndrome in children  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview nephrotic-syndrome Clinical trials Nephrotic syndrome   Nephrotic syndrome is a condition which causes the kidneys to leak large amounts of protein into the urine. This can lead to a range of problems, including swelling of body tissues and a greater chance of catching infections. Although nephrotic syndrome can affect people of any age, it's usually first diagnosed in children aged between two and five. It affects more boys than girls. Around 1 in every 50,000 children are diagnosed with the condition each year. It tends to be more common in families with a history of allergies or those of an Asian background, although it's unclear why. The symptoms of nephrotic syndrome can usually be controlled with steroid medication. Most children with nephrotic syndrome respond well to steroids and aren't at risk of kidney failure. However, a small number of children have congenital (inherited) nephrotic syndrome and usually do less well. They may eventually have kidney failure and need a kidney transplant. What problems can it cause? Most children with nephrotic syndrome have times when their symptoms are under control (remission), followed by times when symptoms return (relapses). In most cases, relapses become less frequent as they get older and often stop by their late teens. Some of the main symptoms associated with nephrotic syndrome include: Swelling \u2013 the low level of protein in the blood reduces the flow of water from body tissues back into the blood vessels, leading to swelling (oedema). Swelling is usually first noticed around the eyes, then around the lower legs and rest of the body. Infections \u2013 Antibodies are a specialised group of proteins in the blood that help to fight infection. When these are lost, children are much more likely to get infections. Urine changes \u2013 Occasionally, the high levels of protein being passed into the urine can cause it to become \"frothy\". Some children with nephrotic syndrome may also pass less urine than usual during relapses. Blood clots \u2013 Important proteins that help to prevent the blood from clotting can be passed out in the urine of children with nephrotic syndrome. This can increase their risk of potentially serious blood clots. During a relapse, the blood also becomes more concentrated, which can lead to clotting. Causes of nephrotic syndrome Most children with nephrotic syndrome have \"minimal change disease\". This means that their kidneys appear normal or nearly normal if a tissue sample is studied under a microscope. The cause of minimal change disease is unknown. Nephrotic syndrome can sometimes occur as a result of a kidney problem or another condition, such as: glomerulosclerosis \u2013 when the inside of the kidney becomes scarred glomerulonephritis \u2013 inflammation inside the kidney an infection \u2013 such as HIV or hepatitis  lupus diabetes sickle cell anaemia in very rare cases, certain types of cancer \u2013 such as leukaemia, multiple myeloma or lymphoma These problems tend to be more common in adults with nephrotic syndrome. Diagnosing nephrotic syndrome Nephrotic syndrome can usually be diagnosed after dipping a dipstick into a urine sample. If there are large amounts of protein in a person's urine, there will be a colour change on the stick. A blood test showing a low level of a protein called albumin will confirm the diagnosis. In some cases, when the initial treatment doesn't work, your child may need a kidney biopsy. This is when a very small sample of kidney tissue is removed using a needle, so it can be studied under a microscope. Managing nephrotic syndrome The main treatment for nephrotic syndrome is steroids, but additional treatments may also be used if a child develops significant side effects. Most children have relapses until their late teens and need to take steroids when these occur. Your child may be referred to a childhood kidney specialist (paediatric nephrologist) for tests and specialist treatment. Steroids Children diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome for the first time are normally prescribed at least a four-week course of the steroid medicine prednisolone, followed by a smaller dose every other day for four more weeks. This stops protein leaking from your child's kidneys into their urine. When prednisolone is prescribed for short periods, there's usually no serious or long-lasting side effects, although some children may experience: increased appetite weight gain red cheeks mood changes Most children respond well to treatment with prednisolone, with the protein often disappearing from their urine and the swelling going down within a few weeks. This period is known as remission. Diuretics Diuretics, or \"water tablets\", may also be given to help reduce the fluid build-up. They work by increasing the amount of urine produced. Penicillin Penicillin is an antibiotic and may be prescribed during relapses to reduce the chances of an infection. Dietary changes To prevent further water retention and oedema, you may be advised to reduce the amount of salt in your child's diet. This means avoiding processed foods and not adding salt to what you eat. Read some tips on how to cut down on salt. Vaccinations Children with nephrotic syndrome are advised to have the pneumococcal vaccine. Some children may also be recommended the varicella (chickenpox) vaccination between relapses. Live vaccines (such as MMR, chickenpox and BCG) shouldn't be given while your child is taking medication to control their symptoms. Additional medication Other medications may be used alongside or in place of steroids if your child's remission can't be maintained with steroids, or if they experience significant side effects. Additional medications that may be used include: levamisole cyclophosphamide ciclosporin tacrolimus mycophenolate rituximab Albumin infusions Most of the protein lost in nephrotic syndrome is a type called albumin. If your child's symptoms are severe, they may be admitted to hospital to receive albumin infusions. Albumin is slowly added to the blood over a few hours, through a thin plastic tube called a cannula that's inserted into one of the veins in their arm. Caring for your child at home If your child has been diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome, you'll need to monitor their condition on a daily basis to check for signs of relapses. You'll need to use a dipstick to test your child's urine for protein the first time they urinate each day. The results of a dipstick test are recorded as either: negative \u2013 0mg of proteinuria per decilitre of urine (mg\/dL) trace \u2013 15-30mg\/dL 1+ \u2013 30-100mg\/dL 2+ \u2013 100-300mg\/dL 3+ \u2013 300\/1,000mg\/dL 4+ \u2013 over 1,000mg\/dL The result for each day needs to be written down in a diary for your doctor or specialist nurse to review during your outpatient appointments. You should also note down the dose of any medication they're taking and any other comments, such as whether your child is feeling unwell. If the dipstick shows 3+ or more of protein in the urine for three days in a row, this means your child is having a relapse. If this happens, you either need to follow the advice given about starting steroids or contact your doctor. You should seek immediate medical advice if: your child has come into contact with someone who has chickenpox or measles and your doctor has told you that your child is not immune to these illnesses your child is unwell or has a fever your child has diarrhoea and is vomiting Congenital nephrotic syndrome Congenital nephrotic syndrome is usually caused by an inherited faulty gene. For the condition to be passed on to a child, both parents must have a healthy copy of the gene and a faulty one. This means they don\u2019t have nephrotic syndrome themselves, but there's a one in four chance that any children they have will develop the condition. Treating congenital nephrotic syndrome If your child has congenital nephrotic syndrome, they'll need frequent albumin infusions to help them grow and develop normally. This often requires a stay in hospital. Sometimes, parents can be trained to administer the treatment at home and your child will be regularly reviewed in a clinic, where their blood pressure, growth, weight, kidney function and bone health will be monitored. It can be difficult for parents to decide which option is best, so you should talk to your doctor about the pros and cons of hospital-based and home-based treatment. Dialysis and kidney transplants In some cases, your doctor may recommend surgery to remove one or both of your child's kidneys. This will stop proteins being lost in your child's urine and reduce their risk of potentially serious problems, such as blood clots. This means they'll be dependent on dialysis (a machine that replicates kidney function) from an early age until they can receive a kidney transplant. A person only needs one kidney to survive. Therefore, a living person can donate a kidney. Ideally, this should be a close relative. Read more about kidney transplants. Information about your child If your child has congenital nephrotic syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 21\/04\/2016 Next review due: 21\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 86 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful What do our kidneys do? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. The kidneys filter waste products from the blood before turning it to urine. This video explains in detail how the kidneys function. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Kidney health Dialysis Kidney transplant External links National Kidney Federation: nephrotic syndrome infoKID: nephrotic syndrome Keeping your kidneys healthy Five simple lifestyle tips to keep your kidneys healthy and functioning well Helping your child live with kidney disease Tips for parents of children with kidney disease, including making friends and taking medicines Are your kidneys healthy? Take this short assessment to find out if you need to have your kidney function checked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nettle rash","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Nettle-rash","content":"Urticaria (hives) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Urticaria (hives)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Nettle-rash Clinical trials Urticaria (hives) Nettle-rash Causes Nettle-rash Diagnosis Nettle-rash Treatment Introduction  Urticaria \u2013 also known as hives, weals, welts or nettle rash \u2013 is a raised, itchy rash that appears on the skin. It may appear on one part of the body or be spread across large areas.  The rash is usually very itchy and ranges in size from a few millimetres to the size of a hand. Although the affected area may change in appearance within 24 hours, the rash usually settles within a few days. Doctors may refer to urticaria as either: acute urticaria \u2013 if the rash clears completely within six weeks chronic urticaria \u2013 in rarer cases, where the rash persists or comes and goes for more than six weeks, often over many years A much rarer type of urticaria, known as urticaria vasculitis, can cause blood vessels inside the skin to become inflamed. In these cases, the weals last longer than 24 hours, are more painful, and can leave a bruise. When to seek medical advice Visit your GP if your symptoms don't go away within 48 hours. You should also contact your GP if your symptoms are: severe causing distress disrupting daily activities occurring alongside other symptoms Who's affected by urticaria? Acute urticaria (also known as short-term urticaria) is a common condition, estimated to affect around one in five people at some point in their lives. Children are often affected by the condition, as well as women aged 30 to 60, and people with a history of allergies. Chronic urticaria (also known as long-term urticaria) is much less common, affecting up to five in every 1,000 people in England. What causes urticaria? Urticaria occurs when a trigger causes high levels of histamine and other chemical messengers to be released in the skin. These substances cause the blood vessels in the affected area of skin to open up (often resulting in redness or pinkness) and become leaky. This extra fluid in the tissues causes swelling and itchiness. Histamine is released for many reasons, including: an allergic reaction \u2013 such as a food allergy or a reaction to an insect bite or sting cold or heat exposure  infection \u2013 such as a cold certain medications \u2013 such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or antibiotics However, in many cases of urticaria, no obvious cause can be found. Some cases of long-term urticaria may be caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking healthy tissue. However, this is difficult to diagnose and the treatment options are the same. Certain triggers may also make the symptoms worse. These include: drinking alcohol or caffeine emotional stress warm temperature Read more about the causes of urticaria. Diagnosing urticaria Your GP will usually be able to diagnose urticaria by examining the rash. They may also ask you questions to find out what triggered your symptoms. If your GP thinks that it's caused by an allergic reaction, you may be referred to an allergy clinic for an allergy test. However, if you've had urticaria most days for more than six weeks, it's unlikely to be the result of an allergy. You may also be referred for a number of tests, including a full blood count (FBC), to find out whether there's an underlying cause of your symptoms. Read more about diagnosing urticaria. Treating urticaria In many cases, treatment isn't needed for urticaria, because the rash often gets better within a few days. If the itchiness is causing you discomfort, antihistamines can help. Antihistamines are available over the counter at pharmacies \u2013 speak to your pharmacist for advice. A short course of steroid tablets (oral corticosteroids) may occasionally be needed for more severe cases of urticaria. If you have persistent urticaria, you may be referred to a skin specialist (dermatologist). Treatment usually involves medication to relieve the symptoms, while identifying and avoiding potential triggers. Read about treating urticaria. Complications of urticaria Around a quarter of people with acute urticaria and half of people with chronic urticaria also develop angioedema, which is a deeper swelling of tissues. Chronic urticaria can also be upsetting and negatively impact a person's mood and quality of life. Angioedema Angioedema is swelling in the deeper layers of a person's skin. It's often severe and is caused by a build-up of fluid. The symptoms of angioedema can affect any part of the body, but usually affect the: eyes lips genitals hands feet Medication such as antihistamines and short courses of oral corticosteroids (tablets) can be used to relieve the swelling. Read more about treating angioedema. Emotional impact Living with any long-term condition can be difficult. Chronic urticaria can have a considerable negative impact on a person's mood and quality of life. Living with itchy skin can be particularly upsetting. One study found that chronic urticaria can have the same negative impact as heart disease. It also found that one in seven people with chronic urticaria had some sort of psychological or emotional problem, such as:  stress anxiety depression See your GP if your urticaria is getting you down. Effective treatments are available to improve your symptoms. Talking to friends and family can also improve feelings of isolation and help you cope better with your condition. Read about how talking to others can help. Anaphylaxis Urticaria can be one of the first symptoms of a severe allergic reaction known as anaphylaxis. Other symptoms of anaphylaxis include: swollen eyes, lips, hands and feet feeling lightheaded or faint narrowing of the airways, which can cause wheezing and breathing difficulties abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting  collapsing and becoming unconsciousness Anaphylaxis should always be treated as a medical emergency. Call 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance if you or someone else is experiencing anaphylaxis. Tell the operator about your (or their) symptoms. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/02\/2016 Next review due: 28\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 719 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 378  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 201  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaphylaxis Angioedema Antihistamines Corticosteroids Itching Long-term condition assessment External links Allergy UK: urticaria and angioedema British Association of Dermatologists: urticaria and angioedema Common skin conditions Facts about some of the most common skin problems, including causes and available treatments Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes Allergies Advice on allergies such as eczema and food allergy, and what treatments are available on the NHS NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neuralgia, postherpetic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/postherpetic-neuralgia","content":"Post-herpetic neuralgia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Post-herpetic neuralgia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview postherpetic-neuralgia Clinical trials Post-herpetic neuralgia postherpetic-neuralgia Treatment Introduction  Post-herpetic neuralgia is a persistent nerve pain that occurs at the site of a previous attack of shingles. It's estimated that up to one in every five people with shingles will go on to develop post-herpetic neuralgia, and older people are particularly at risk. The pain can improve after a few months and medication can help control it in the meantime, although some cases are more persistent and can even be permanent. Why does it happen? In post-herpetic neuralgia, the varicella zoster virus (the virus that causes chickenpox and shingles) damages nerves under the skin of the affected area. It is not clear why some people with shingles develop post-herpetic neuralgia, but increasing age, pain in the early (prodromal) stage of a shingles attack and severe pain throughout an episode of shingles are all associated with an increased risk of the condition. Signs and symptoms The main symptom of post-herpetic neuralgia is continuous nerve pain in an area previously affected by shingles. The pain has been described as burning, stabbing, shooting, aching or throbbing. The affected area may also: feel intensely itchy be more sensitive to pain than usual (hyperalgesia) feel painful as a result of something that would not normally hurt (allodynia), such as a light touch or a cool breeze Living with post-herpetic neuralgia can be very difficult, as it can interfere with your ability to carry out certain daily activities, such as dressing and bathing, and can lead to further problems such as extreme tiredness (fatigue), sleeping difficulties and depression. Read about living with long-term pain for information and tips on how to cope. Seeing your GP It is important to revisit your GP if you experience persistent pain after having shingles to discuss the medications available to help control it. Post-herpetic neuralgia is easy to diagnose based on your symptoms and medical history because it only occurs as a complication of shingles, and the pain will be in the area of the body that was affected by the condition. How post-herpetic neuralgia is treated Many people with post-herpetic neuralgia make a full recovery within a year of developing the condition. But occasionally the nerves do not heal completely and symptoms last for several years or permanently. Medication can ease the symptoms of post-herpetic neuralgia, although they may not relieve the pain completely. As post-herpetic neuralgia generally doesn't respond to standard painkillers such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, alternative medications will need to be prescribed. These will often be medications originally intended to treat depression (antidepressants) or epilepsy (anticonvulsants), but have since been found to also be effective in relieving nerve pain. Read more about treating post-herpetic neuralgia. Can post-herpetic neuralgia be prevented? There is no definite way to prevent post-herpetic neuralgia. However, antiviral medication will often be given early during an episode of shingles to help reduce the risk of complications such as post-herpetic neuralgia. Alternatively, you can reduce your risk of post-herpetic neuralgia by having the shingles vaccination to try to prevent an attack of shingles occurring. This vaccine is routinely offered to older people on the NHS. It is given as a single injection to anyone aged 70. There is also a catch-up programme for those aged 78 and 79. You will only need to have this vaccine once. If you wish to have the shingles vaccine and you are not eligible for the NHS vaccination programme, you will usually need to visit a private clinic. Private vaccination is likely to cost £100 to £200. Trigeminal neuralgia This article focuses on post-herpetic neuralgia, a common type of nerve pain that occurs after a previous attack of shingles. Despite having a similar name, trigeminal neuralgia is a much rarer type of facial nerve pain that occurs in sudden short attacks lasting from a few seconds to about two minutes. Read more about trigeminal neuralgia. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/08\/2014 Next review due: 12\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 320 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 151  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antidepressants Chickenpox Living with pain Shingles Trigeminal neuralgia External links The British Pain Society Pain Concern Shingles Find out about shingles, a painful condition caused by the chickenpox virus Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neuralgia, trigeminal","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Trigeminal-neuralgia","content":"Trigeminal neuralgia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Trigeminal neuralgia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Trigeminal-neuralgia Community Trigeminal neuralgia Trigeminal-neuralgia Symptoms Trigeminal-neuralgia Causes Trigeminal-neuralgia Diagnosis Trigeminal-neuralgia Treatment Introduction  Trigeminal neuralgia is a sudden, severe facial pain, described as sharp, shooting or like an electric shock. It usually occurs in sudden short attacks lasting from a few seconds to about two minutes, which stop just as abruptly. In the vast majority of cases it affects part or all of one side of the face, with the pain most commonly felt in the lower part of the face. Very occasionally it affects both sides of the face, but not normally at the same time. People with the condition may experience attacks of pain regularly for days, weeks or months at a time. In severe cases, attacks may occur hundreds of times a day. It's possible for the pain to improve or even disappear altogether for several months or years at a time (known as a period of remission), although these periods of remission tend to get shorter with time. Some people may then go on to develop a more continuous aching, throbbing and burning sensation, sometimes accompanied by the sharp attacks. Typically, the attacks of pain are brought on by activities that involve lightly touching the face, such as washing, eating and brushing the teeth, but they can also be triggered by wind (even a slight breeze or air conditioning) or movement of the face or head. Sometimes, the pain can occur without any trigger whatsoever. Living with trigeminal neuralgia can be very difficult and it can have a significant impact on a person's quality of life, resulting in problems such as weight loss, isolation and depression. Read more about the symptoms of trigeminal neuralgia. When to seek medical advice You should see your GP if you experience frequent or persistent facial pain, particularly if standard painkillers such as paracetamol and ibuprofen do not help and a dentist has ruled out any dental causes. Your GP will try to identify the problem by asking about your symptoms and ruling out conditions that could be responsible for your pain. However, diagnosing trigeminal neuralgia can be difficult, and it can take a few years for a diagnosis to be confirmed. Read more about diagnosing trigeminal neuralgia. What causes trigeminal neuralgia? In the vast majority of cases, trigeminal neuralgia is caused by compression of the trigeminal nerve. This is the largest nerve inside the skull, which transmits sensations of pain and touch from your face, teeth and mouth to your brain. This compression is usually caused by a nearby blood vessel pressing on part of the nerve inside the skull. In rare cases, trigeminal neuralgia can occur as a result of damage to the trigeminal nerve, caused by an underlying condition such as multiple sclerosis (MS) or a tumour. Read more about the causes of trigeminal neuralgia. Who is affected It's not clear exactly how many people are affected by trigeminal neuralgia, but the condition is thought to be rare. Some studies have suggested that around 27 in every 100,000 people are diagnosed with the condition in the UK each year, although this figure is probably too high as the condition tends to be over-diagnosed by doctors. Other estimates have suggested that there are about 6,500 new cases diagnosed each year in the UK. The condition affects women more often than men and is rare in people under the age of 40, although it can occur in younger people. Most cases are first seen in people between the ages of 50 and 60. How trigeminal neuralgia is treated Trigeminal neuralgia is usually a long-term condition, and the periods of remission often get shorter over time. However, most cases can be controlled to at least some degree with treatment. The first treatment offered will usually be with an anticonvulsant medication (usually used to treat epilepsy) called carbamazepine. To be effective, this medication needs to be taken several times a day, with the dose gradually increased over the course of a few days or weeks so that high enough levels of the medication can build up in your bloodstream. Unless your pain starts to diminish or disappears altogether, the medication is usually continued for as long as is necessary, sometimes for many years. If you are entering a period of remission and your pain goes away, stopping the medication should always be done slowly over days or weeks, unless you are advised otherwise by a doctor. Carbamazepine was not originally designed to treat pain, but it can help relieve nerve pain by slowing down electrical impulses in the nerves and reducing their ability to transmit pain messages. If this medication is ineffective, unsuitable or causes too many side effects, you may be referred to a specialist to discuss alternative medications or surgical procedures that may help. There are a number of minor surgical procedures that can be used to treat trigeminal neuralgia \u2013 usually by damaging the nerve to stop it sending pain signals \u2013 but these are generally only effective for a few years. Alternatively, your specialist may recommend having surgery to open up your skull and move away any blood vessels compressing the trigeminal nerve. Research suggests this operation offers the best results in terms of long-term pain relief, but it is a major operation and carries a risk of potentially serious complications, such as hearing loss, facial numbness or, very rarely, a stroke. Read more about treating trigeminal neuralgia. Postherpetic neuralgia This article focuses on trigeminal neuralgia, a rare type of neuralgia most commonly seen in people between the ages of 50 and 60. Postherpetic neuralgia is a more common type of neuralgia that usually develops after a previous shingles infection. Read more about postherpetic neuralgia. Page last reviewed: 22\/07\/2014 Next review due: 22\/07\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 339 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 159  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with pain MRI scan Multiple sclerosis Postherpetic neuralgia External links Brain & Spine Foundation: face pain NINDS: trigeminal neuralgia The Pain Toolkit Trigeminal Neuralgia Association UK How to get NHS help for long-term pain Find out how to get help from your GP or local hospital if you have persistent pain Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neuroblastoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Neuroblastoma","content":"Neuroblastoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neuroblastoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview neuroblastoma Clinical trials Neuroblastoma   Neuroblastoma is a rare type of cancer that mostly affects babies and young children. It develops from specialised nerve cells (neuroblasts) left behind from a baby's development in the womb. Neuroblastoma most commonly occurs in one of the adrenal glands situated above the kidneys, or in the nerve tissue that runs alongside the spinal cord in the neck, chest, tummy or pelvis. It can spread to other organs such as the bone marrow, bone, lymph nodes, liver and skin. It affects around 100 children each year in the UK and is most common in children under the age of five. The cause is unknown. There are very rare cases where children in the same family are affected, but generally neuroblastoma doesn't run in families. This page covers: Symptoms Tests and diagnosis Stages Treatment and outlook Support groups and charities Symptoms of neuroblastoma The symptoms of neuroblastoma vary depending on where the cancer is and whether it has spread. The early symptoms can be vague and hard to spot, and can easily be mistaken for those of more common childhood conditions. Symptoms can include: a swollen painful tummy, sometimes in association with constipation and difficulty passing urine  breathlessness and difficulty swallowing a lump in the neck blueish lumps in the skin and bruising, particularly around the eyes weakness in the legs and an unsteady walk, with numbness in the lower body, constipation and difficulty passing urine fatigue, loss of energy, pale skin, loss of appetite and weight loss bone pain, a limp and general irritability rarely, jerky eye and muscle movements See your GP or contact NHS 111 if you're worried your child might be seriously ill. Tests for neuroblastoma A number of tests may be carried out if it's thought your child could have neuroblastoma. These tests may include: a urine test \u2013 to check for certain chemicals produced by neuroblastoma cells that are found in urine scans \u2013 such as ultrasound scans, computerised tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of various parts of the body to look at these areas in detail  an mIBG scan \u2013 this involves the injection of a substance taken up by neuroblastoma cells  a biopsy \u2013 the removal of a sample of cells from the tumour tissue  for examination under a microscope so the type of cancer can be identified; the sample is usually removed under general anaesthetic using a special needle bone marrow biopsies \u2013 to see if there are cancer cells in the bone marrow Once these tests have been completed, it will usually be possible to confirm if the diagnosis is neuroblastoma and determine what stage it is. Stages of neuroblastoma As with most cancers, neuroblastoma is given a stage. This indicates if it has spread and, if so, how far. The staging system used for neuroblastoma is: stage L1 \u2013 the cancer is just in one place and hasn't spread, and can be removed by surgery stage L2 \u2013 the cancer is in one place and hasn't spread, but can't be removed safely by surgery stage M \u2013 the cancer has spread to other parts of the body stage Ms \u2013 the cancer has spread to the skin, liver or bone marrow in children aged less than 18 months Knowing the stage of your child's neuroblastoma will allow doctors to decide which treatment is best. Treatment and outlook for neuroblastoma The main treatments for neuroblastoma are: surgery to remove the cancer \u2013 sometimes this may be all that's needed chemotherapy (where medication is used to kill cancer cells) \u2013 this may be the only treatment needed or it may be given to shrink the cancer before surgery radiotherapy (where radiation is used to kill cancer cells) \u2013 this may sometimes be used after surgery to destroy any remaining cancer cells in the affected area high-dose chemotherapy followed by a stem cell transplant \u2013 where stem cells from your child are collected, frozen and stored prior to intensive chemotherapy, and are given back to them afterwards immunotherapy \u2013 where a medication that directly targets the neuroblastoma cells is given, although this isn't used routinely yet Some babies and infants less than 18 months old with either stage L1 or Ms neuroblastoma who have no symptoms may not need any treatment, as the cancer can sometimes go away on its own. The outlook for neuroblastoma varies considerably, and is generally better for younger children whose cancer hasn't spread. Your doctors will be able to give you more specific information about your child. Almost half of neuroblastomas are a type that can return despite intensive treatment. Further treatment will often be necessary in these cases. Support groups and charities Being told your child has cancer can be a distressing and daunting experience.  You may find it useful to contact a support group or charity, such as: Cancer Research UK Children's Cancer and Leukaemia Group Children with Cancer UK CLIC Sargent Macmillan Cancer Support Neuroblastoma UK Solving Kids' Cancer These are good sources of further information and advice. They may also have local support groups in your area where you can meet up with other parents. Clinical trials If your child is diagnosed with neuroblastoma, you may be asked to take part in a clinical trial. Clinical trials are used to assess the effectiveness of different treatments. If you're interested, ask your doctors about any trials your child may be able to participate in. You may also wish to search the database of clinical trials for neuroblastoma to see what research is currently being carried out. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/08\/2016 Next review due: 15\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 32 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: neuroblastoma Macmillan: neuroblastoma in children Neuroblastoma UK Solving Kids' Cancer Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. 'I had cancer at 14' Charlotte Esler was diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma at the age of 14. She talks about her experience NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neuroendocrine tumours","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neuroendocrine-tumours","content":"Neuroendocrine tumours - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neuroendocrine tumours  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neuroendocrine-tumours Reuters news Neuroendocrine-tumours Clinical trials Neuroendocrine tumours Introduction  Neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) are rare tumours that can occur in the cells of the neuroendocrine system. The neuroendocrine system consists of nerve and gland cells. It produces hormones and releases them into the bloodstream. NETs are tumours (abnormal growths) that develop in the cells of the neuroendocrine system. NETs can be malignant (cancerous) or benign (non-cancerous) and often \u2013 but not always \u2013 grow slowly. There are a number of different types of NET, depending on the specific cells affected. Types of neuroendocrine tumours Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (GEP NETs) are tumours that develop in the gut or pancreas. Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumours (GI NETs) develop in the digestive system, which includes the bowel, stomach or oesophagus. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (pNETs) develop in the pancreas. Pulmonary neuroendocrine tumours develop in the lungs. Rarely, NETs can also develop in other parts of the body, including in the liver, gallbladder, bile ducts, kidneys, ovaries, or testicles. Some NETs, known as functioning tumours, produce hormones that cause specific symptoms. Tumours that don't cause symptoms are known as non-functioning tumours. Symptoms of neuroendocrine tumours The symptoms of a neuroendocrine tumour can vary depending on where it is and what hormones it produces. For example, a tumour in the digestive system may cause diarrhoea, constipation or tummy pains. A tumour in the lung may cause wheezing or a persistent cough. Some tumours (functioning tumours) may cause abnormally large amounts of hormones to be released into the bloodstream. This can cause symptoms such as diarrhoea, flushing, cramps, wheezing, low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia), changes in blood pressure and heart problems. What causes neuroendocrine tumours? What causes neuroendocrine tumours isn't fully understood. However, your chance of developing an NET is increased if you have one of the following rare conditions or syndromes: multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) \u2013 a rare inherited condition where tumours in the endocrine system develop, most commonly in the parathyroid glands, pituitary gland and the pancreas neurofibrmatosis type 1 \u2013 a group of genetic conditions that cause tumours to grow along your nerves Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) \u2013 an inherited condition that causes blood vessels to grow abnormally Research has also shown that your risk of developing an NET is slightly increased if one of your parents has had one in the past. Diagnosing neuroendocrine tumours There are many tests that can be used to diagnose NETs, including blood tests, urine tests, scans, and a biopsy (where a small tissue sample is taken for closer examination). Different types of scans may also be used to identify or examine tumours. These include: ultrasound scans \u2013 including echocardiograms and endoscopic ultrasound scans computerised tomography (CT) scans magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans positron emission tomography (PET) scans octreotide scans \u2013 where mild radioactive liquid is injected into your veins and a special camera is used to highlight any cancerous cells The Cancer Research UK website has more information about tests for rare cancers.  Treating neuroendocrine tumours How a neuroendocrine tumour is treated will depend on your individual circumstances. For example, your treatment will depend on: where the tumour is how advanced your condition is your overall health   Unfortunately, many people are only diagnosed after other parts of their body are affected. However, it may still be possible to surgically remove the tumour, even if it has spread to other parts of your body. If surgery can't be used to completely cure your condition, it may be used to help manage and reduce any symptoms that you have. It may also be possible to shrink the tumour or stop further growth using treatments that block the blood supply to the tumour (embolisation), or chemotherapy, radiotherapy or radiofrequency ablation (where heat is used to destroy the cells). The Cancer Research UK website has more information about neuroendocrine tumours (NETs). Information about you If you have neuroendocrine tumours, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Coping with cancer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. In this video, people who have been through cancer treatment talk about what kept them going and the practicalities of treatment. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Page last reviewed: 04\/11\/2014 Next review due: 04\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 58 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Find cancer support services Living with cancer External links Cancer Research UK: neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) Macmillan: neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) NET Patient Foundation: information and support Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neurofibromatosis type 1","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Neurofibromatosis","content":"Neurofibromatosis type 1 - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neurofibromatosis type 1  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neurofibromatosis Clinical trials Neurofibromatosis type 1 Neurofibromatosis Symptoms Neurofibromatosis Causes Neurofibromatosis Diagnosis Neurofibromatosis Treatment Introduction  Neurofibromatosis is the general name for a number of genetic conditions that cause tumours to grow along your nerves. Tumours are swellings formed by a growth of cells. In neurofibromatosis, the tumours are usually non-cancerous (benign). Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is the most common type, affecting about one in 3,000 births. Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2), which is much less common, has different symptoms and is caused by changes in different genes, so is covered separately. Read about neurofibromatosis type 2. What are the symptoms of NF1? NF1 is a condition you're born with, although some symptoms develop gradually over many years. The severity of the condition can vary considerably from person to person. In most cases of NF1 the skin is affected, causing symptoms such as: pale, coffee-coloured patches (café au lait spots) soft, non-cancerous bumps on or under the skin (neurofibromas) Certain health problems are often associated with NF1, such as learning difficulties. Less commonly, NF1 is associated with a type of cancer known as malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours. Read more about the symptoms of neurofibromatosis type 1. What is the cause? NF1 is caused by a genetic mutation, which is a permanent change in the DNA sequence that makes up a gene. As a result, the growth of nerve tissue isn't properly controlled. In half of all cases of NF1, the genetic mutation is passed from a parent to their child. In other cases, the genetic mutation appears to develop spontaneously. Although genetic tests can be carried out during pregnancy to check if your child will have NF1, most cases are diagnosed after birth from the characteristic symptoms. Read more about the causes of neurofibromatosis type 1 and diagnosing neurofibromatosis type 1. How is it treated? There's currently no cure for NF1. Treatment involves regular monitoring and treating any problems as they occur. This can involve surgery to remove tumours and improve bone abnormalities, medication to control secondary conditions such as high blood pressure, and therapy for behavioural problems. In many cases, careful monitoring and treatment can help people with NF1 live a full life. However, there's a risk of developing serious problems such as certain types of cancer, which can reduce life expectancy in some people by up to 15 years. Read more about treating neurofibromatosis type 1. The Neuro Foundation The Neuro Foundation is a UK charity that aims to improve the lives of people with neurofibromatosis (either type 1 or type 2). For more information, you can visit The Neuro Foundation, call its helpline on 020 8439 1234, or email info@nfauk.org. Information about you If you or your child has NF1, your clinical team will pass information about you\/your child on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 16\/03\/2015 Next review due: 16\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 126 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Serious conditions and special needs in children Learning difficulties Benign brain tumours Neurofibromatosis type 2 Scoliosis Living with a long-term condition External links The Neuro Foundation Children\u2019s Tumor Foundation Give your health a boost with tips on losing weight, healthy eating, exercise, drinking less, stopping smoking and lots more. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neurofibromatosis type 2","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/neurofibromatosis-type-2","content":"Neurofibromatosis type 2 - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neurofibromatosis type 2  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview neurofibromatosis-type-2 Clinical trials Neurofibromatosis type 2 neurofibromatosis-type-2 Symptoms neurofibromatosis-type-2 Causes neurofibromatosis-type-2 Diagnosis neurofibromatosis-type-2 Treatment Introduction  Neurofibromatosis is the general name for a number of genetic conditions that cause tumours to grow along your nerves. Tumours are abnormal tissue growths. In neurofibromatosis, the tumours are usually non-cancerous (benign). Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is the most common type, affecting about 1 in 3,000 births. This is covered separately \u2013 read about neurofibromatosis type 1. These pages focus on neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) \u2013 a less common type, affecting about 1 in 33,000 people. What are the symptoms of NF2? Almost everyone with NF2 develops tumours on the nerves responsible for hearing and balance. These typically cause symptoms such as: gradual hearing loss, that usually gets worse over time  ringing or buzzing in the ears (tinnitus) balance problems, particularly when moving in the dark or walking on uneven ground Tumours can also develop inside the brain or spinal cord, or the nerves to the arms and legs. This can cause symptoms such as weakness in the arms and legs, and persistent headaches. Read more about the symptoms of NF2. What is the cause? NF2 is caused by a genetic mutation, which is a permanent change in the DNA sequence that makes up a gene. As a result, the growth of nerve tissue isn't properly controlled. In half of all cases of NF2, the genetic mutation is passed from a parent to their child. In other cases, the genetic mutation appears to develop spontaneously (sporadic mutation). Although there are genetic tests that can be carried out during pregnancy to check if your child will have NF2, most cases are diagnosed using tests after birth. Read more about the causes of NF2 and diagnosing NF2. How is it treated? There's currently no cure for NF2. Treatment involves regular monitoring and treating any problems as they occur. Surgery can be used to remove most tumours, although it carries a risk of causing problems, such as complete deafness or facial weakness. Therefore, the risks and potential benefits need to be carefully considered before treatment. Most people with NF2 eventually develop significant hearing loss and often benefit from learning to lip read or using a hearing aid. Special implants can sometimes be inserted to improve a person's hearing. NF2 tends to get worse over time, although the speed at which this happens can vary considerably. However, most people with NF2 eventually lose their hearing completely, and some people require a wheelchair or other type of mobility device. Tumours developing inside the brain and spinal cord can place a strain on the body and shorten life expectancy. However, improved techniques used to diagnose, monitor and treat the condition are thought to have increased life expectancy and improved the quality of life for many people with NF2. Read more about treating NF2. The Neuro Foundation The Neuro Foundation is a UK charity that aims to improve the lives of people with neurofibromatosis (either type 1 or type 2). For more information, you can visit The Neuro Foundation website, call its helpline on 020 8439 1234, or email info@nfauk.org. Information about you If you or your child has NF2, your clinical team will pass information about you\/your child on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Tinnitus Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A common symptom of NF2 is tinnitus. Tinnitus causes people to hear constant sounds in one ear, both ears or in their head. An audiologist explains the possible causes and effects it often has, and how to deal with them. Ashleigh, who was diagnosed with tinnitus in 2005, describes how she copes with it. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Page last reviewed: 13\/03\/2015 Next review due: 13\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 40 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Benign brain tumours Hearing impairment Living with hearing problems Neurofibromatosis type 1 External links The Neuro Foundation NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neuromyelitis optica","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Neuromyelitis-optica","content":"Neuromyelitis optica - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Neuromyelitis optica  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Neuromyelitis-optica Clinical trials Neuromyelitis optica Introduction  Neuromyelitis optica (NMO), also known as Devic's disease, is a rare neurological condition. Neurological conditions are caused by disease or damage to the brain, spinal cord or nerves. NMO most commonly affects the optic nerves and spinal cord, which can lead to optic neuritis and transverse myelitis (see below). Some people may only experience optic neuritis or myelitis but may have the aquaporin-4 antibody (also see below). In such cases, a person is said to have an NMO spectrum disorder (NMOSD). Each person with NMO will experience different symptoms and require individually tailored care and support. Some of the main symptoms of NMO include: muscle weakness \u2013 reduced strength in one or more muscles that can affect mobility impaired eyesight nerve pain \u2013 which can be a sharp, burning, shooting or numbing pain spasms and increased muscle tone \u2013 from nerve damage that affects muscle control bladder, bowel and sexual problems NMO UK has more information about the symptoms of NMO. Optic neuritis Optic neuritis is inflammation of the nerve that leads from the eye to the brain. It causes a reduction or loss of vision, and can affect both eyes at the same time. Other symptoms of optic neuritis include eye pain, which is usually made worse by movement, and reduced colour vision where colours may appear \u2018washed out\u2019 or less vivid than usual. Transverse myelitis Transverse myelitis is inflammation of the spinal cord. It causes weakness in the arms and legs which can range from a mild 'heavy' feeling in one limb, to complete paralysis in all four limbs. It may cause numbness, tingling or burning below the affected area of the spinal cord and increased sensitivity to touch, cold and heat. There may also be tight and painful muscle contractions (known as tonic muscle spasms). Relapses in NMO An attack or relapse of NMO results in the nervous system becoming inflamed. The inflammation usually occurs in the optic nerve and spinal cord, and causes new symptoms or the recurrence of previous symptoms. Less common symptoms of NMO can include unexplained nausea and vomiting, unexplained itching and tonic spasms (painful muscle contractions). In someone with known NMO, these symptoms may signify a new relapse. NMO symptoms can range from mild to severe. In some cases, there may only be one attack of optic neuritis or transverse myelitis, with good recovery and no further relapses for a long time. However, in severe cases, there can be a number of attacks which lead to disability. Disability occurs because the body can't always fully recover from damage caused by the attacks on the spinal cord and optic nerve. NMO UK has more information about NMO relapses. What causes NMO? NMO is an autoimmune condition, which means a person\u2019s immune system (the body\u2019s natural defence against illness and infection) reacts abnormally and attacks the body's tissues and organs. An antibody against a protein called aquaporin-4 is present in the blood of up to 80% of people with NMO. Antibodies are proteins produced by the body to destroy disease-carrying organisms and toxins. In NMO, the immune system attacks aquaporin-4 which damages the myelin sheath (the protective layer that surrounds nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord and helps transmit nerve signals). Who's affected by NMO? NMO is a rare condition. In Europe, it's estimated that there's one case of NMO for every 100,000 people. In the UK, it's thought that NMO affects less than 1,000 people. NMO can affect anyone but it's more common in women than men, with about four females being affected for every male. Although the condition is thought to be more common in people of Asian and African descent, an increasing number of white (Caucasian) people are also being diagnosed. Diagnosing NMO It's important that NMO is correctly diagnosed. It can sometimes be confused with multiple sclerosis, which also affects the brain and spinal cord and has similar symptoms. However, the treatment is different. A neurology specialist will discuss your symptoms and medical history with you. You'll have a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of your brain and spinal cord. Some people with NMO (up to 60%) have lesions on their brain and spine, which are different to the lesions of someone with MS. A blood sample will be taken and tested for aquaporin-4 antibodies. A lumbar puncture is another test you may have. A sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is taken from the spine using a hollow needle that's inserted into the lower part of the spine. The fluid sample will be sent to a laboratory to be tested and to look for evidence of conditions affecting the brain, spinal cord or other parts of the nervous system. In some cases of transverse myelitis, there's an increase in the level of proteins or white cells. NMO UK has more information about how NMO is diagnosed. Treating NMO There's no cure for NMO, so treatment aims to manage attacks and symptoms, and prevent relapses. Every person with NMO is affected differently and some may have much milder symptoms than others. However, early treatment is usually needed to prevent further episodes and permanent disability. Medication is used to reduce nerve inflammation, suppress the immune system and treat any pain. Rehabilitation techniques, such as physiotherapy, can also help with any reduced mobility that the relapses cause. In the UK, NMO is recognised as a rare condition that requires specialist neurological input and two national referral centres have been designated. They are: The Walton Centre in Liverpool John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford At these centres, research is ongoing to find possible future treatments for NMO. To be referred to one of these centres, a GP referral letter is all that's needed. These specialist services are nationally funded, so GP practices won't have any additional costs for referring. NMO UK has more information about treatments for NMO. Driving Optic neuritis (inflammation of the optic nerve) could affect your ability to drive. You have a legal obligation to tell the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) about any medical condition that could have an impact on your driving ability. See GOV.UK for more information about driving with a disability or health condition. Information about you If you have NMO, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Neuromyelitis optica occurs when the protective covering (myelin sheath) that surrounds the nerves in the brain and spinal cord is damaged  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/10\/2014 Next review due: 28\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 103 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support Occupational therapy Physiotherapy Visual impairment External links Brain & Spine Foundation Neuromyelitis Optica (NMO) NINDs: neuromyelitis optica Pain Concern What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neuropathy, peripheral","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Peripheral-neuropathy","content":"Peripheral neuropathy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Peripheral neuropathy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Peripheral-neuropathy Clinical trials Peripheral-neuropathy Community Peripheral neuropathy Peripheral-neuropathy Symptoms Peripheral-neuropathy Causes Peripheral-neuropathy Diagnosis Peripheral-neuropathy Treatment Peripheral-neuropathy Complications   Peripheral neuropathy develops when nerves in the body's extremities \u2013 such as the hands, feet and arms \u2013 are damaged. The symptoms depend on which nerves are affected. In the UK, it's estimated that almost 1 in 10 people aged 55 or over are affected by some degree of peripheral neuropathy. The peripheral nervous system The peripheral nervous system is the network of nerves that lie outside the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord). It includes different types of nerves with their own specific functions, including: sensory nerves \u2013 responsible for transmitting sensations, such as pain and touch motor nerves \u2013 responsible for controlling muscles autonomic nerves \u2013 responsible for regulating automatic functions of the body, such as blood pressure and bladder function Symptoms of peripheral neuropathy The main symptoms of peripheral neuropathy can include: numbness and tingling in the feet or hands burning, stabbing or shooting pain in affected areas loss of balance and co-ordination muscle weakness, especially in the feet These symptoms are usually constant, but may come and go. Read more about symptoms of peripheral neuropathy. When to see your GP It's important to see your GP if you experience the early symptoms of peripheral neuropathy, such as: pain, tingling or loss of sensation in the feet loss of balance or weakness a cut or ulcer on your foot that isn't getting better It's also recommended that people at highest risk of peripheral neuropathy, such as people with diabetes, have regular check-ups. Your GP will ask about your symptoms and may arrange some tests to help identify the underlying cause. You may be referred to hospital to see a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the nervous system). Generally, the sooner peripheral neuropathy is diagnosed, the better the chance of limiting the damage and preventing further complications. Read more about diagnosing peripheral neuropathy. Causes of peripheral neuropathy In the UK, diabetes (both type 1 and type 2) is the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy. Over time, the high blood sugar levels associated with diabetes can damage the nerves. This type of nerve damage is known as diabetic polyneuropathy. Peripheral neuropathy can also have a wide range of other causes. For example, it can be caused by: physical injury to the nerves a viral infection such as shingles a side effect of certain medications or drinking too much alcohol People who are known to be at an increased risk of peripheral neuropathy may have regular check-ups so their nerve function can be assessed. Read more about the causes of peripheral neuropathy. Treating peripheral neuropathy Treatment for peripheral neuropathy depends on the symptoms and underlying cause. Only some of the underlying causes of neuropathy can be treated. For example, if you have diabetes it may help to gain better control of your blood sugar level, stop smoking and cut down on alcohol. Nerve pain may be treated with prescribed medications called neuropathic pain agents, as standard painkillers are often ineffective. If you have other symptoms associated with peripheral neuropathy, these may need to be treated individually. For example, treatment for muscle weakness may involve physiotherapy and the use of walking aids. Read more about treating peripheral neuropathy. Complications of peripheral neuropathy The outlook for peripheral neuropathy varies, depending on the underlying cause and which nerves have been damaged. Some cases may improve with time if the underlying cause is treated, whereas in some people the damage may be permanent or may get gradually worse with time. If the underlying cause of peripheral neuropathy isn't treated, you may be at risk of developing potentially serious complications, such as a foot ulcer that becomes infected. This can lead to gangrene (tissue death) if untreated, and in severe cases may mean the affected foot has to be amputated. Peripheral neuropathy may affect the nerves controlling the automatic functions of the heart and circulation system (cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy). You may need treatment to increase your blood pressure or, in rare cases, a pacemaker. Read more about complications of peripheral neuropathy. Polyneuropathy Peripheral neuropathy may affect: only one nerve (mononeuropathy) several nerves (mononeuritis multiplex) all the nerves in the body (polyneuropathy) Polyneuropathy is the most common type and starts by affecting the longest nerves first, so symptoms typically begin in the feet. Over time it gradually starts to affect shorter nerves so feels as if it's spreading upwards, later affecting the hands. Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 766 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 358  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 216  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Diabetes Postherpetic neuralgia Trigeminal neuralgia Living with pain Living with diabetes Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Erythromelalgia External links Diabetes UK: neuropathy Gain charity Foundation for Peripheral Neuropathy Pain Concern Trigeminal Neuralgia Assocation UK Living with diabetes How to live healthily with diabetes, including advice on diet and lifestyle Diabetes and feet Foot health is especially important for people with diabetes. Find out how to take care of your feet and when to get help Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Neutropenia (white blood cell deficiency)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/agranulocytosis","content":"Agranulocytosis and neutropenia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Agranulocytosis and neutropenia (white blood cell deficiencies)   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Agranulocytosis and neutropenia Introduction  Granulocytes are a type of white blood cell that help fight infection. 'Agranulocytosis' and 'neutropenia' are terms often used to describe a deficiency of these cells. However, the two terms shouldn't be used interchangeably, as they describe slightly different conditions. agranulocytosis is the term used when the bone marrow (soft tissue inside bone) fails to make enough granulocytes neutropenia is the term used when the bone marrow fails to make enough of a specific group of granulocytes called neutrophils Although these conditions are slightly different, they tend to share many similar causes and symptoms, and are often treated in a similar way. What causes agranulocytosis and neutropenia? Agranulocytosis and neutropenia usually occur later in life, as the result of another condition or treatment (acquired), but can sometimes be present from birth (congenital). Depending on the cause, your white blood cell count may recover over time. However, in some cases, the problem can be persistent. Acquired agranulocytosis and neutropenia Common causes of acquired agranulocytosis or neutropenia include: chemotherapy or a bone marrow transplant (or preparation for a bone marrow transplant) certain medications \u2013 including some anti-psychotics and some medications for an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) an autoimmune disorder (where the body's immune system mistakenly attacks its own tissues) \u2013 such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis a bone marrow disease \u2013 such as myelodysplasia (where blood cells do not develop properly) or leukaemia certain infections \u2013 including HIV and hepatitis Congenital agranulocytosis and neutropenia Congenital agranulocytosis or neutropenia can be caused by several rare genetic faults (altered genes) that may be passed on to a child by one or both of his or her parents. Individuals of Afro-Caribbean descent often have a naturally slightly lower neutrophil count than those of other ethnic origins, but this is entirely normal and does not lead to any health problems. Signs and symptoms Most people with agranulocytosis or neutropenia will not have any obvious symptoms. However, these conditions may mean you are more vulnerable to picking up infections because you don't have enough white blood cells to fight germs effectively. Symptoms associated with an infection can include: a high temperature (fever) chills and shivering headaches sweating facial flushing a sore throat or mouth mouth ulcers swollen glands a lack of energy flu-like symptoms In some people, infections can spread quickly through the body and can lead to a life-threatening condition called sepsis. In addition to some of the above symptoms, sepsis can also cause a fast heartbeat and fast breathing. Seeking medical advice Most people at risk of agranulocytosis or neutropenia should already be aware of signs to look out for, and will have been told what to do if they experience them. For example, if you have been having chemotherapy, your cancer care team may have given you a telephone number you can call if you experience any problems, such as a high temperature. If you know you are at risk of these white blood cell deficiencies and you start to feel unwell, it's important to contact your doctor or care team immediately. Sepsis is a medical emergency and should be assessed by a doctor in hospital as soon as possible so appropriate treatment can be started quickly. Diagnosing and managing agranulocytosis and neutropenia If your doctor suspects you have agranulocytosis or neutropenia, they will carry out a blood test to check the level of white blood cells in your blood. If one of these conditions is diagnosed, the treatment and advice offered to you will depend on the cause and severity of your condition. Reducing your infection risk You will often be given some advice about ways you can reduce your risk of infection while your white blood cell count is low. This may include: avoiding undercooked and some raw foods that could lead to food poisoning avoiding close contact with people you know have an infection making sure you store and prepare food properly maintaining good personal hygiene, such as washing your hands with soap and warm water regularly Read more about food safety and preventing germs from spreading. Antibiotics If you develop an infection, you will usually need to be treated with antibiotics because your body will not be able to fight the infection itself. Depending on the severity of the infection, you may be given antibiotic tablets to take at home, or you may need to have antibiotics given directly into a vein (intravenously) while in hospital. In some cases, you may be given a course of low-dose antibiotics to take to stop infections developing in the first place. G-CSF injections Some people may need injections of a medication called G-CSF (granulocyte-colony stimulating factor), which can stimulate the bone marrow to produce more white blood cells. Granulocyte infusions In very rare cases, you may need to go to hospital to have a type of blood transfusion where you are just given granulocyte cells. Granulocytes for transfusion are ideally taken from a donor who is a friend or relative. The donor is given corticosteroid medication plus G-CSF, which helps them to produce more granulocytes and increases the number of these in their blood. The donor's blood is then removed and the white cells are separated out for transfusion. The transfusion is usually given through a tiny plastic tube called a cannula, which is inserted into a vein in your arm. Bone marrow transplant In particularly severe cases, you may need a bone marrow transplant (stem cell transplant) to replace your damaged bone marrow with healthy bone marrow stem cells taken from a donor. White blood cells play a key role in fighting infection  Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a treatment for cancer where medication is used to kill cancerous cells. Find out more about its effects Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/09\/2014 Next review due: 24\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 107 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Blood tests Blood transfusion Bone marrow (stem cell) transplant Chemotherapy External links Lab Tests Online: white blood cell count Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections Donating blood Doctors rely on blood donations to carry out life-saving treatments every day. Find out how you can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Newborn blood spot screening","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/newborn-blood-spot-test.aspx","content":"Newborn blood spot test - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Newborn blood spot test Every baby is offered newborn blood spot screening, also known as the heel prick test, ideally when they are five days old. Newborn blood spot screening involves taking a blood sample to find out if your baby has one of nine rare but serious health conditions. Most babies screened won't have any of these conditions but, for the few who do, the benefits of screening are enormous. Early treatment can improve their health and prevent severe disability, and even death. What does the blood spot test involve? When your baby is five days old, a health professional will prick their heel using a special device and collect four drops of blood on a special card. You can minimise any distress to your baby by cuddling and feeding them, and making sure they are warm and comfortable. Occasionally, the sample may need to be taken when your baby is six, seven or eight days old. Sometimes a second blood spot sample is needed. The reason for this will be explained to you. It doesn't necessarily mean there is something wrong with your baby. The test doesn't carry any known risks for your baby. Which conditions is the blood spot test for? The blood spot test screens for the following nine rare but serious conditions. If you, your partner, or a family member already has one of these conditions (or a family history of it), please tell your health professional straight away. Sickle cell disease About 1 in 2,000 babies born in the UK has sickle cell disease. This is a serious inherited blood disease. Sickle cell disease affects haemoglobin, the iron-rich protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen around the body. Babies who have this condition will need specialist care throughout their lives. People with sickle cell disease can have attacks of severe pain and get serious, life-threatening infections. They are usually anaemic because their blood cells have difficulty carrying oxygen. The blood spot screening test means that babies with sickle cell disease can receive early treatment to help them live healthier lives. This may include vaccinations and antibiotics to prevent serious illnesses. Pregnant women are also routinely tested for sickle cell disease early in pregnancy. Read more about sickle cell disease, or download leaflets for parents whose child has sickle cell disease. Cystic fibrosis About 1 in 2,500 babies born in the UK has cystic fibrosis. This inherited condition affects the digestion and lungs. Babies with cystic fibrosis may not gain weight well and frequently have chest infections. Babies with the condition can be treated early with a high-energy diet, medicines, and physiotherapy. Although children with cystic fibrosis may still become very ill, early treatment can help them live longer, healthier lives. Read more about cystic fibrosis, or download a leaflet for parents whose baby has suspected cystic fibrosis. Congenital hypothyroidism About 1 in 3,000 babies born in the UK has congenital hypothyroidism. Babies with congenital hypothyroidism do not have enough of the hormone thyroxine. Without thyroxine, babies do not grow properly and can develop learning disabilities. Babies who have the condition can be treated early with thyroxine tablets, and this allows them to develop normally. See more information about congenital hypothyroidism (CHT). Inherited metabolic diseases It is important to let your health professional know if you have a family history of a metabolic disease (a disease that affects your metabolism). Babies are screened for six inherited metabolic diseases. These are: phenylketonuria (PKU) medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD) maple syrup urine disease (MSUD)  isovaleric acidaemia (IVA)  glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1)  homocystinuria (pyridoxine unresponsive) (HCU)  About 1 in 10,000 babies born in the UK has PKU or MCADD. The other conditions are rarer, occurring in 1 in 100,000 to 150,000 babies. Without treatment, babies with inherited metabolic diseases can become suddenly and seriously ill. The diseases all have different symptoms. Depending on which one affects your baby, the condition may be life threatening or cause severe developmental problems. They can all be treated with a carefully managed diet and, in some cases, medicines as well. What are amino acids? Our bodies break down protein foods like meat and fish into amino acids (the building blocks of protein). Any amino acids that aren't needed are usually broken down and removed from the body. Babies with the inherited metabolic diseases that are screened for are unable to break down one or more amino acids. When levels of these amino acids get very high, they are harmful. Does my baby have to have the blood spot test? It's not compulsory, but it's recommended because it could save your baby's life.  You can choose to have screening for sickle cell disease, cystic fibrosis or congenital hypothyroidism individually but you can only choose to have screening for all six inherited metabolic diseases or none at all. If you don't want your baby to be screened for any of these conditions, discuss it with your midwife. You should be given information about the blood spot test and the diseases it screens for in advance so you can make an informed decision for your baby. If you change your mind, babies can be screened up to the age of 12 months for all the conditions except cystic fibrosis. Cystic fibrosis can only be screened for up to eight weeks of age. If you have any concerns about the tests, speak to your midwife, health visitor, or GP. When will we get the results? You should receive the results either by letter or from a health professional by the time your baby is six to eight weeks old. The results should be recorded in your baby's personal child health record (red book). It's important to keep this safe and take it with you to all your baby's appointments. If you have not received your baby's results, speak to your health visitor or GP. You will be contacted sooner if your baby screens positive. This means they're more likely to have one of the conditions tested for. If your baby is thought to have congenital hypothyroidism (CHT) or an inherited metabolic disease, you will be contacted the day the result is available, or the next working day, and given an appointment to see a specialist. If your baby is thought to have cystic fibrosis, you will be contacted before they are four weeks old. If your baby is thought to have sickle cell disease, you will be contacted before they are six weeks old. Screening for cystic fibrosis finds some babies who may be genetic carriers of the condition. These babies may need further testing. Screening for sickle cell disease also finds babies who are carriers of this or other red blood cell diseases. Carriers are healthy, although they can experience problems in situations where their bodies aren't getting much oxygen \u2013 for example, if they are having an anaesthetic. Parents of babies who are found to be carriers should be told by the time they are six to eight weeks old. Read more about what being a carrier means. What do the results mean? Most babies will have a normal result, which means it's unlikely that they have any of the conditions. A small number of babies will screen positive for one of the conditions. This doesn't mean they have the condition, but they are more likely to have it. They will be referred to a specialist for further tests. It's important to know that screening is not 100% certain. A baby with a negative screening result may later turn out to have the disease screened for. This is known as a false negative. Babies with a positive result sometimes turn out not to have the disease \u2013 what's known as a false positive. Occasionally, other medical conditions are picked up by blood spot test screening. For example, babies with beta thalassaemia major (a serious blood disease) will usually be detected. These babies will also need to be referred for early treatment. If your baby's blood spot test is positive The NHS screening programme has produced leaflets for parents who have been told their baby may have one of the conditions screened for. The leaflets provide information about the condition, further tests your baby may be offered, and what treatment is needed. They also answer parents' questions, including where to find support. See FAQs on blood spot screening. Find out what happens to your baby's blood spot card. The Screening Tests for You and Your Baby leaflet contains information about the blood spot screening test and the conditions it screens for. It is available in other languages. Newborn blood spot test: Lucy and Chris's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Hattie had the routine newborn blood spot test which all babies have at five to eight days. She tested positive for a genetic condition. Her parents Lucy and Chris describe how they were told about the test results, their initial fears, and that thanks to the test Hattie's condition was recognised early enough to prevent complications. Media last reviewed: 21\/01\/2015 Next review due: 21\/01\/2017 Page last reviewed: 04\/02\/2015 Next review due: 04\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 33 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Help for sore or cracked nipples With the right help and support, sore or cracked nipples while breastfeeding can often be sorted out Tip for new parents Tips for new parents, including how to get breastfeeding off to a good start and how to 'top and tail' or bathe your newborn Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Related articles Getting to know your newborn Newborn blood spot FAQs Parenting: sleep and tiredness Your baby's weight and height External links British Thyroid Foundation Climb: National Information Centre for Metabolic Diseases Cystic Fibrosis Trust National Society for Phenylketonuria Sickle Cell Society British Inherited Metabolic Disease Group NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Newborn physical examination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/Pages\/newborn-physical-exam.aspx","content":"Newborn physical examination - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Newborn physical examination Within 72 hours of giving birth, all parents are offered a thorough physical examination for their baby. This includes babies who are born at home. This examination includes specific screening tests to find out if your baby has any problems with their eyes, heart, hips and, in boys, the testicles (testes). This examination is part of the Newborn and Infant Physical Examination (NIPE) screening programme. The newborn physical examination is usually carried out in hospital before you go home. Sometimes it's done at a hospital or community clinic, GP surgery, children's centre, or at home.  Ideally, both parents should be there when the examination is done. The health professional doing the examination should explain what it involves. This could be a doctor, midwife, nurse or health visitor, and they will have had specific training to undertake the examination. Some parts of the examination may be a little uncomfortable for your baby, but it won't cause them any pain. The aim is to spot any problems early so treatment can be started as soon as possible. Usually, nothing of concern is found. If the health professional carrying out the examination does find a possible problem, they may refer your baby for more tests. You will be offered another physical examination for your baby at six to eight weeks, as some of the conditions it screens for can take a while to develop. This second examination is usually done at your GP's surgery. How is the newborn physical examination done? The health professional will give your baby a thorough physical examination. They will also ask you questions about how your baby is feeding, how alert they are, and about their general wellbeing. Your baby will need to be undressed for part of the examination. During the examination, the health professional will also: look into your baby's eyes with a special torch called an ophthalmoscope to check how their eyes look and move listen to your baby's heart to check their heart sounds examine their hips to check the joints examine baby boys to see if their testicles are in the right place What does the newborn physical examination check for? The examination includes an overall physical check plus four different screening tests. Eyes The health professional will check the appearance and movement of your baby's eyes. They are looking for cataracts, which is a clouding of the transparent lens inside the eye, and other conditions. About 2 or 3 in 10,000 babies are born with problems with their eyes that require treatment. However, the examination can't tell you how well your baby can see. See how cataracts are diagnosed and treated.   Heart The health professional will also check your baby's heart. This is done by observing your baby, feeling your baby's pulses, and listening to their heart with a stethoscope. Sometimes heart murmurs are picked up. A heart murmur is where the heartbeat has an extra or unusual sound caused by a disturbed blood flow through the heart. Heart murmurs are common in babies. The heart is normal in almost all cases where a murmur is heard. However, about 1 in 200 babies has a heart problem that needs treatment. See more about diagnosing and treating heart problems in newborns. Hips Some newborns have hip joints that are not formed properly. This is known as developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH). Left untreated, this can cause a limp or joint problems. About 1 or 2 in 1,000 babies have DDH that needs treating. See more about developmental dysplasia of the hip. Testicles Baby boys are checked to make sure their testicles are in the right place. During pregnancy, the testicles form inside the baby's body. They may not drop down into the scrotum until a few months after birth. In about 1 in 100 baby boys, the testicles descend only partially or not at all. This needs treating to prevent possible problems later in life, such as reduced fertility. See more about undescended testicles. Does my baby have to have the examination? The aim of the examination is to identify any of the problems early so that treatment can be started as soon as possible. It's strongly recommended for your baby, but not compulsory. You can decide to have your baby examined and screened for any or all of the conditions. If you have any concerns, you should talk to your midwife or the health professional who is offering the examination. When will we get the results? The health professional carrying out the examination will give you the results straight away. If your baby needs referring for more tests, they will discuss this with you there and then, too.  The results will be recorded in your baby's personal child health record (red book). You'll need to keep this safe and have it to hand whenever your baby sees a health professional. If you have any concerns, you can discuss them with your midwife or the health professional who does the examination. Download a leaflet about screening tests for you and your baby. Page last reviewed: 11\/02\/2015 Next review due: 11\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 11 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Getting to know your new baby Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Soothing a crying baby External links Children's Heart Federation Great Ormond Street Hospital: undescended testicles Macmillan: retinoblastoma RNIB: congenital cataracts Steps: developmental dysplasia of the hip Tiny Tickers Your post-pregnancy body Discover how your body may change after having a baby, with advice on postnatal exercises Breastfeeding: the first few days What to expect, including how your milk \"comes in\" and what the let-down reflex feels like Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nexplanon","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/contraceptive-implant.aspx","content":"Contraceptive implant - Contraceptive guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: Contraceptive implant A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method is the implant. At a glance: facts about the contraceptive implant   How it works   Who can use it   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks   Where you can get it The contraceptive implant is a small flexible tube about 40mm long that's inserted under the skin of your upper arm. It's inserted by a trained professional, such as a doctor, and lasts for three years.  The implant stops the release of an egg from the ovary by slowly releasing progestogen into your body. Progestogen also thickens the cervical mucus and thins the womb lining. This makes it harder for sperm to move through your cervix, and less likely for your womb to accept a fertilised egg. At a glance: the implant If implanted correctly, it's more than 99% effective. Fewer than one woman in 1,000 who have the implant as contraception for three years will get pregnant. It's very useful for women who know they don't want to get pregnant for a while. Once the implant is in place, you don't have to think about contraception for three years.  It can be useful for women who can't use contraception that contains oestrogen.  It's very useful for women who find it difficult to take a pill at the same time every day.  If you have side effects, the implant can be taken out. You can have the implant removed at any time, and your natural fertility will return very quickly. When it's first put in, you may feel some bruising, tenderness or swelling around the implant.  In the first year after the implant is fitted, your periods may become irregular, lighter, heavier or longer. This usually settles down after the first year.  A common side effect of the implant is that your periods stop (amenorrhoea). It's not harmful, but you may want to consider this before deciding to have an implant.  Some medications can make the implant less effective, and additional contraceptive precautions need to be followed when you are taking these medications (see Will other medicines affect the implant?). The implant does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using condoms as well as the implant, you'll help to protect yourself against STIs. How the implant works The implant steadily releases the hormone progestogen into your bloodstream. Progestogen is similar to the natural hormone progesterone, which is released by a woman's ovaries during her period. The continuous release of progestogen: stops a woman releasing an egg every month (ovulation)  thickens the mucus from the cervix (entrance to the womb), making it difficult for sperm to pass through to the womb and reach an unfertilised egg makes the lining of the womb thinner so that it is unable to support a fertilised egg You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you The implant can be put in at any time during your menstrual cycle, as long as you and your doctor are reasonably sure you are not pregnant. In the UK, Nexplanon is the main contraceptive implant currently in use. Implants inserted before October 2010 were called Implanon. Since October 2010, insertion of Implanon has decreased as stocks are used up, and Nexplanon has become the most commonly used implant. Both types of implant work in the same way, but Nexplanon is designed to reduce the risk of insertion errors and is visible on an X-ray or CT (computerised tomography) scan. There is no need for existing Implanon users to have their implant removed and replaced by Nexplanon ahead of its usual replacement time. Nexplanon is a small, thin, flexible tube about 4cm long. It is implanted under the skin of your upper arm by a doctor or nurse. A local anaesthetic is used to numb the area. The small wound made in your arm is closed with a dressing and does not need stitches. Nexplanon works for up to three years before it needs to be replaced. You can continue to use it until you reach the menopause, when a woman\u2019s monthly periods stop (at around 52 years of age). The implant can be removed at any time by a specially trained doctor or nurse. It only takes a few minutes to remove, using a local anaesthetic. As soon as the implant has been removed, you will no longer be protected against pregnancy. When it starts to work If the implant is fitted during the first five days of your menstrual cycle, you will be immediately protected against becoming pregnant. If it is fitted on any other day of your menstrual cycle, you will not be protected against pregnancy for up to seven days, and should use another method, such as condoms.   After giving birth You can have the contraceptive implant fitted after you have given birth, usually after three weeks. If it is fitted on or before day 21 after the birth, you will be immediately protected against becoming pregnant.  If it is fitted after day 21, you will need to use additional contraception, such as condoms, for the following seven days. It is safe to use the implant while you are breastfeeding. After a miscarriage or abortion The implant can be fitted immediately after a miscarriage or an abortion, and you will be protected against pregnancy straight away. Who can use the implant Most women can be fitted with the contraceptive implant. It may not be suitable if you: think you might be pregnant want to keep having regular periods  have bleeding in between periods or after sex have arterial disease or a history of heart disease or stroke have a blood clot in a blood vessel (thrombosis) have liver disease  have migraines have breast cancer or have had it in the past have diabetes with complications have cirrhosis or liver tumours are at risk of osteoporosis   Advantages and disadvantages of the implant The main advantages of the contraceptive implant are: it works for three years the implant does not interrupt sex it is an option if you cannot use oestrogen-based contraception, such as the combined contraceptive pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring you do not have to remember to take a pill every day the implant is safe to use while you are breastfeeding your fertility should return to normal as soon as the implant is removed implants offer some protection against pelvic inflammatory disease (the mucus from the cervix may stop bacteria entering the womb) and may also give some protection against cancer of the womb the implant may reduce heavy periods or painful periods after the first year of use after the contraceptive implant has been inserted, you should be able to carry out normal activities Using a contraceptive implant may have some disadvantages, which you should consider carefully before deciding on the right method of contraception for you. These include: Disrupted periods Your periods may change significantly while using a contraceptive implant. Around 20% of women using the implant will have no bleeding, and almost 50% will have infrequent or prolonged bleeding. Bleeding patterns are likely to remain irregular, although they may settle down after the first year. Although these changes are not harmful, they may not be acceptable for some women. Your GP may be able to help by providing additional medication if you have prolonged bleeding. Other side effects that some women report are: headaches acne nausea breast tenderness changes in mood loss of sex drive These side effects usually stop after the first few months. If you have prolonged or severe headaches or other side effects, tell your doctor. Some women put on weight while using the implant, but there is no evidence to show that the implant causes weight gain. Will other medicines affect the implant? Some medicines can reduce the implant's effectiveness. These include: medication for HIV medication for epilepsy complementary remedies, such as St John's Wort an antibiotic called rifabutin (which can be used to treat tuberculosis) an antibiotic called rifampicin (which can be used to treat several conditions, including tuberculosis and meningitis) These are called enzyme-inducing drugs. If you are using these medicines for a short while (for example, rifampicin to protect against meningitis), it is recommended that you use additional contraception during the course of treatment and for 28 days afterwards. The additional contraception could be condoms, or a single dose of the contraceptive injection. The implant can remain in place if you have the injection. Women taking enzyme-inducing drugs in the long term may wish to consider using a method of contraception that isn't affected by their medication. Always tell your doctor that you are using an implant if you are prescribed any medicines. Ask your doctor or nurse for more details about the implant and other medication. Risks of the implant In rare cases, the area of skin where the implant has been fitted can become infected. If this happens, the area will be cleaned and may be treated with antibiotics. Where you can get the contraceptive implant Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching by postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first. Page last reviewed: 31\/12\/2014 Next review due: 31\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1376 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 879  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 242  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Condoms Female condoms External links Brook: for young people FPA: sexual health information Contraceptive injection It lasts for eight to 13 weeks (depending on the type) and you can forget about it until it needs renewing Emergency contraception Emergency contraception (the pill or IUD) can be used to prevent pregnancy after unprotected sex Where to get contraception Find out where you can go to get information about contraception, and to get the method you choose Sexual health services Find out where you can go if you need advice about STIs, contraception or pregnancy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"NHS Health Check","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nhs-health-check\/Pages\/NHS-Health-Check.aspx","content":"NHS Health Check - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories NHS Health Check About NHS Health Check What is it? For adults aged 40-74, it's a free check of your vascular health How to get one You'll be invited to have one every five years, but where it happens may vary What to expect Find out what questions and tests you'll have at your NHS Health Check The science part The NHS Health Check is based on decades of research by experts Your FAQs Some common NHS Health Check questions and answers 'My wake-up call' Bala's NHS Health Check was the push he needed to take care of himself What's your heart age? Take the heart age test to see how healthy your heart is NHS Health Check in your area Boosting your quality of life Why have an NHS Health Check? Why have one? Your NHS Health Check is your chance to take control of your health Your quality of life Research shows that inactivity and disability are closely linked in old age Don't be an ostrich Men are at a higher risk, so why are they less likely to go for a check-up? 'It helped my dad' TV presenter Dr Dawn says NHS Health Check changed her father's life 'I was forewarned' Jane's high blood pressure improved after her NHS Health Check The biggest killers Lowering your risk of CVD, dementia, diabetes and kidney disease 'NHS Health Check saved my life' Father-of-three Ron, 48, talks about the lucky escape he had thanks to his NHS Health Check What to expect at your NHS Health Check Take the online heart age test Acting on your results Your results explained Understanding your NHS Health Check scores  Take action Whatever your NHS Health Check results, you can make healthy changes Apps and trackers Health and fitness apps can help you get in shape, starting today 'I'm on the right path' Karen successfully quit smoking and lost weight after her major surgery Video library Watch people talking about their NHS Health Check results Weight loss plan If you're overweight, start losing weight with your free NHS plan Couch to 5K running plan With this audio running plan you'll go from couch potato to running 5K in just nine weeks Get fitness advice Improve your diet Quit smoking Keep track of your alcohol units What is an NHS Health Check? The NHS Health Check is your chance to get your free midlife MOT. For adults in England aged 40-74 without a pre-existing condition, it checks your circulatory and vascular health and what your risk of getting a disabling vascular disease is. This guide explains what happens at the check, when and how you get one, and how to lower your risk. How do I get an NHS Health Check? If you're in the 40-74 age group without a pre-existing condition, you can expect to receive a letter from your GP or local authority inviting you for a free NHS Health Check. Don't worry if you haven't got your invitation yet, as you will be invited for one over the next few years. In the meantime, there are other ways of getting your health checked.  Why should I get checked? As we get older, we have a higher risk of developing something dangerous like high blood pressure, heart disease or type 2 diabetes. Your NHS Health Check can spot early signs and help prevent these happening to you, which means you'll be more likely to enjoy life for longer. Start by taking the online heart age test to see how healthy your heart is. What lifestyle changes can I make? Once you've had your NHS Health Check, your healthcare professional will discuss your results with you. You'll be given advice and support to help you lower your risk and maintain or improve your vascular health. But you don't have to wait until your NHS Health Check appointment to make healthy changes. Start now with these health apps and trackers. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Why have an NHS Health Check?","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/nhs-health-check\/Pages\/Why-have-an-NHS-Health-Check.aspx","content":"Why should I have an NHS Health Check? - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories NHS Health Check About NHS Health Check What is it? For adults aged 40-74, it's a free check of your vascular health How to get one You'll be invited to have one every five years, but where it happens may vary What to expect Find out what questions and tests you'll have at your NHS Health Check The science part The NHS Health Check is based on decades of research by experts Your FAQs Some common NHS Health Check questions and answers 'My wake-up call' Bala's NHS Health Check was the push he needed to take care of himself What's your heart age? Take the heart age test to see how healthy your heart is NHS Health Check in your area Boosting your quality of life Why have an NHS Health Check? Why have one? Your NHS Health Check is your chance to take control of your health Your quality of life Research shows that inactivity and disability are closely linked in old age Don't be an ostrich Men are at a higher risk, so why are they less likely to go for a check-up? 'It helped my dad' TV presenter Dr Dawn says NHS Health Check changed her father's life 'I was forewarned' Jane's high blood pressure improved after her NHS Health Check The biggest killers Lowering your risk of CVD, dementia, diabetes and kidney disease 'NHS Health Check saved my life' Father-of-three Ron, 48, talks about the lucky escape he had thanks to his NHS Health Check What to expect at your NHS Health Check Take the online heart age test Acting on your results Your results explained Understanding your NHS Health Check scores  Take action Whatever your NHS Health Check results, you can make healthy changes Apps and trackers Health and fitness apps can help you get in shape, starting today 'I'm on the right path' Karen successfully quit smoking and lost weight after her major surgery Video library Watch people talking about their NHS Health Check results Weight loss plan If you're overweight, start losing weight with your free NHS plan Couch to 5K running plan With this audio running plan you'll go from couch potato to running 5K in just nine weeks Get fitness advice Improve your diet Quit smoking Keep track of your alcohol units You are here: Health A-Z NHS Health Check Share: Save: Print: Why should I have an NHS Health Check? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Why have an NHS Health Check? Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Think of the NHS Health Check as a midlife MOT. It\u2019s not only an opportunity to put right emerging problems, but to get personalised advice on keeping yourself healthy and active in the future. The NHS Health Check is based on the best scientific evidence from Britain and around the world and can transform people's lives. It provides a rare opportunity to sit down with a health professional and talk about your health requirements. Afterwards, you will be more confident and know more about your health. You should also receive a wellness plan, tailored specifically to your needs.  \u201CThe NHS Health Check is free and should not be missed,\" says Sir Muir Gray, Chief Knowledge Officer of the NHS. \u201CIt will give you the knowledge you need to take control of your health\u201D. Goes to the heart of things Our bodies have many important systems, but one that is central to all of them is our vascular or circulatory system. At its centre is our heart, pumping blood every second of every day through a 100,000-mile network of veins and arteries, which, if lined up end to end, would circle the equator four times.  It\u2019s not only a system that all others depend on, but one that suffers wear and tear. This can lead to a range of debilitating, sometimes life-threatening, conditions such as heart disease, stroke, kidney disease, type 2 diabetes and certain types of dementia. Together, these conditions are the biggest cause of preventable deaths and disability in the UK. The vascular system is what the NHS Health Check is designed to monitor and protect. It tells you how well your vascular system is performing and predicts how it will hold up in the future. Most importantly, it points out changes you can make to get your vascular system running more efficiently, which will reduce wear and tear. \u201COne of the wonderful things about the vascular system is that there are many things we as individuals can do to improve its functioning,\u201D says Sir Muir. \u201CThis test is not just giving you important results. It\u2019s giving you results you can act on.\u201D   Find out more about the vascular system and diseases. Find out more about the NHS Health Check tests. If you're over 30, take the online heart age test now to see how healthy your heart is. Learn your vital stats The NHS Health Check gives you an overall score that you can keep track of and improve over time. Some think of this as their \u201Cheart age\u201D. This single figure is calculated from up to 20 other snippets of information about you, but there are three important statistics that you should know and, from time to time, monitor. These are your: blood pressure BMI (body mass index) cholesterol count  \u201CI liked coming away from the NHS Health Check with facts about my health,\u201D says Peter, a 50-year-old from London. \u201CI roughly knew my BMI, but I had no idea about my blood pressure or cholesterol. My cholesterol was high, but I changed my diet and now it\u2019s normal again.\u201D   Find out what to expect on the day of your NHS Health Check. Find out more about interpreting your results. Read how Bala, 67, changed his lifestyle and brought his cholesterol level down after his NHS Health Check. Get an action plan As important as the NHS Health Check is, the action plan for health improvement that comes with it is the real game changer. Some people end up with a NHS Health Check score that is better than normal and no changes will be necessary. But for most of us, some change will be recommended. For example, you may be advised to be more physically active or cut down on the amount of fat, salt or sugar in your diet. If your NHS Health Check suggests you are at higher risk, you might also be offered medicines to control your blood pressure or lower your cholesterol, along with help to take action with losing weight or stopping smoking. Tailored support If there are changes you need to make, you will be offered a tailored plan and support for meeting your goals. This will vary depending on where you live, and there are some excellent resources available. For example, in Buckinghamshire, one NHS Health Check attendee lost four stone after being referred to a specialist weight loss programme.  Meanwhile, in Richmond, London, people having NHS Health Checks have embarked on a range of lifestyle services, depending on their needs, including alcohol and stop smoking services, and a diabetes prevention programme. John Goodall, Public Health Wiltshire, says: \"The NHS Health Check is much more than a check-up. \"It gives you a plan of action to improve your health over time, with someone who is well placed to advise and encourage you to make healthy changes.\" If you live in Wiltshire and you're found to be at higher risk, you could also benefit from the council's Active Health programme and other health services. Your GP or health care professional can refer you to specially trained exercise professionals based at local leisure centres, who will devise an individual programme for you. John Goodall, from Public Health Wiltshire, says: \u201CThe NHS Health Check is much more than just a check-up. It gives you a plan of action to improve your health over time, by providing you with a one-to-one interaction with someone who is well placed to advise and encourage you to make healthy changes.\"  \"If you're already leading a healthy life and are at low risk, that's marvellous. In Wiltshire, everyone attending an NHS Health Check should receive individual advice and support, whatever their risk. They\u2019ll also get a lifestyle leaflet, which includes an array of local activity programmes they can join.\" Get more advice on taking action to improve your NHS Health Check results. But you don't have to wait until you're invited for a NHS Health Check to start leading a healthier life: Need to lose weight? Download your NHS weight loss plan today. Couch potato? You won't be once you've completed the Couch to 5K running programme. Want to quit smoking? Get stop smoking support here. Still not convinced? There's little joy in living to the age of 100 or more if we have to spend many years being treated for serious conditions that can affect our quality of life and stop us doing the things that make us happy. By getting an NHS Health Check, knowing your results and making changes that will help you lead a healthy life, you can look forward to: More time with family and friends By attending your NHS Health Check and making healthy changes, you're more likely to live longer and have more time with your friends and family. This includes having more time to watch any children and grandchildren grow up. Living independently for longer By keeping healthy, you can live independently in your own home for longer. This means you'll be less likely to need extra social care and support from other people, including members of your family. If you have to spend many years in a state of ill-health, your quality of life will be affected. Improved emotional wellbeing Being unwell over a long period of time can significantly reduce our chances of being able to do the things that make us happy, like seeing other people, playing sports and taking part in activities, such as volunteering or having hobbies. Keeping healthy is good for our emotional as well as physical wellbeing. Staying in work for longer Good health improves your chances of finding and staying in work, and being in work is generally beneficial for our health, as well as benefiting our self-esteem and our wallets. On the other hand, being unwell can affect our ability to find and stay in work, which can lead to money worries and emotional stress. Find out more about maintaining our quality of life as we get older. What is a TIA (mini stroke)? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) is often called a \"mini stroke\". A TIA has similar signs as a stroke, but generally subsides within 24 hours. Watch this video and get expert advice on what to do if you suspect a TIA. Also see how Alison coped when her mother Gladys displayed all the signs for a TIA. Media last reviewed: 03\/02\/2015 Next review due: 03\/02\/2017 Page last reviewed: 01\/05\/2014 Next review due: 01\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 332 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 298  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles What is an NHS Health Check? What happens at an NHS Health Check? How to get an NHS Health Check Your NHS Health Check results Ron's story: 'I was a walking heart attack' Common questions about NHS Health Check What's your heart age? Take the online test to find out whether your heart age is higher or lower than your actual age Live better for longer By leading a healthier life you'll not only improve your chances of living longer, but your quality of life will get better too 'We only have one life' Find out how Bala has made lifestyle changes since his NHS Health Check that have brought down his cholesterol and blood glucose levels Find services near you Find health and wellbeing services in your area Find and compare services Services Alcohol addiction GP NHS Health Check Pharmacy Pharmacy NHS service: stop smoking service Sports and Fitness Stop smoking support services Walk-in centre Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z 'My blood pressure was too high' Jane Hudson was shocked to discover that she had high blood pressure during her NHS Health Check External links Change4Life Smokefree British Heart Foundation Stroke Association Community content from HealthUnlocked Men's health 40-60 Health and fitness tips for men aged 40 to 60, including dealing with a midlife crisis and how to lose weight Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers 'I learned to swim at 75' Ada Gibson learned to swim at the age of 75. She's proof that it's never too late to get active NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"NHS vaccination schedule","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/vaccination-schedule-age-checklist.aspx","content":"Vaccination schedule - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: When to have vaccinations Here's a checklist of the vaccines that are routinely offered to everyone in the UK for free on the NHS, and the ages at which they should ideally be given. If you're not sure whether you or your child have had all your routine vaccinations, ask your GP or practice nurse to find out for you. It may be possible to catch up later in life. Try to have your vaccinations delivered on time to ensure protection. If you're going to be away from the GP surgery when a vaccination is due, talk to your doctor. It may be possible to arrange to have the vaccination at a different location. 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine \u2013 this single jab contains vaccines to protect against five separate diseases: diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough (pertussis), polio and Haemophilus influenzae type b (known as Hib \u2013 a bacterial infection that can cause severe pneumonia or meningitis in young children)   Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine, second dose Men C vaccine (DISCONTINUED from July 1 2016) Rotavirus vaccine, second dose 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine, third dose Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine, second dose Men B vaccine second dose  One year Hib\/Men C vaccine, given as a single jab containing vaccines against meningitis C (first dose) and Hib (fourth dose) Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, given as a single jab Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine, third dose Men B vaccine, third dose  2-7 years (including children in school years 1, 2 and 3) Children's flu vaccine (annual) 3 years and 4 months Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, second dose 4-in-1 pre-school booster, given as a single jab containing vaccines against diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough (pertussis) and polio 12-13 years (girls only) HPV vaccine, which protects against cervical cancer \u2013 two injections given 6-12 months apart 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster, given as a single jab and contains vaccines against diphtheria, tetanus and polio Men ACWY vaccine, given as a single jab and contains vaccines against meningitis A, C, W and Y 65 years Pneumococcal (PPV) vaccine 65 and over Flu vaccine (every year) 70 years (and 78 and 79 year-olds as a catchup) Shingles vaccine Vaccines for special groups There are some vaccines that aren't routinely available to everyone on the NHS, but that are available for people who fall into certain risk groups, such as vaccines for pregnant women, people with long-term health conditions, and healthcare workers. Additional vaccines for special groups include: flu jab for pregnant women whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women flu vaccine for people with long-term health conditions hepatitis B vaccination  TB vaccination chickenpox vaccination Men ACWY for first-time university entrants Travel vaccines There are some travel vaccines that you should be able to have free on the NHS from your local surgery. These include: hepatitis A vaccine typhoid vaccine  cholera vaccine Other travel vaccines, such as yellow fever vaccination, are only available privately.  Find out more from our section on travel vaccines. Page last reviewed: 14\/03\/2016 Next review due: 14\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 924 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 490  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 123  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 241  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Vaccination calendar Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against Men B vaccine A new Men B vaccine called Bexsero is available on the NHS for babies aged 8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year old NHS Choices links Common questions about vaccination External links Complete NHS immunisation schedule (PDF, 77.6kb) GOV.UK: vaccination timeline (PDF, 2.6Mb) healthtalk.org: real vaccination stories from parents     Search for a local GP Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nicotine replacement therapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/smoking-(quitting)\/Pages\/Treatment.aspx","content":"Stop smoking treatments - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stop smoking treatments  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Smoking-(quitting) Clinical trials Stop smoking treatments   If you want to stop smoking, several different treatments are available from shops, pharmacies and on prescription to help you beat your addiction and reduce withdrawal symptoms. The main options are: Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) Varenicline (Champix) Bupropion (Zyban) E-cigarettes The best treatment for you will depend on your personal preference, your age, whether you're pregnant or breastfeeding and any medical conditions you have. Speak to your GP or an NHS stop smoking adviser for advice. Research has shown that all these methods can be effective. Importantly, evidence shows that they are most effective if used alongside support from an NHS stop smoking service. The treatments available are outlined below. You can also read a summary of the pros and cons of stop smoking treatments, allowing you to compare your options. Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) The main reason that people smoke is because they are addicted to nicotine. NRT is a medication that provides you with a low level of nicotine, without the tar, carbon monoxide and other poisonous chemicals present in tobacco smoke. It can help reduce unpleasant withdrawal effects, such as bad moods and cravings, which may occur when you stop smoking. Where to get it and how to use it NRT can be bought from pharmacies and some shops. It's also available on prescription from a doctor or NHS stop smoking service. It's available as: skin patches chewing gum inhalators (which look like plastic cigarettes) tablets, oral strips and lozenges nasal and mouth spray Patches release nicotine slowly. Some are worn all the time and some should be taken off at night. Inhalators, gum and sprays act more quickly and may be better for alleviating cravings. There's no evidence that any single type of NRT is more effective than another. But there is good evidence to show that using a combination of NRT is more effective than using a single product. Often the best way to use NRT is to combine a patch with a faster acting form such as gum, inhalator or nasal spray. Treatment with NRT usually lasts 8-12 weeks, before you gradually reduce the dose and eventually stop. Who can use it Most people are able to use NRT, including: adults and children over 12 years of age \u2013 although children under 18 shouldn't use the lozenges without getting medical advice first pregnant women \u2013 your doctor may suggest NRT if they think it would help you quit; read more about stopping smoking in pregnancy breastfeeding women \u2013 your doctor can advise you how to do this safely Always read the packet or leaflet before using NRT to check whether it's suitable for you. Sometimes it may be advisable to get medical advice first, for example if you have kidney or liver problems, or you've recently had a heart attack or stroke. Possible side effects Side effects of NRT can include: skin irritation when using patches irritation of nose, throat or eyes when using a nasal spray difficulty sleeping (insomnia), sometimes with vivid dreams an upset stomach dizziness headaches Any side effects are usually mild. But if they're particularly troublesome, contact your GP as the dose or type of NRT may need to be changed. Varenicline (Champix) Varenicline (brand name Champix) is a medication that works in two ways. It reduces cravings for nicotine like NRT, but it also blocks the rewarding and reinforcing effects of smoking. Evidence suggests it's the most effective medication for helping people stop smoking. Where to get it and how to use it Varenicline is only available on prescription, so you'll usually need to see your GP or contact an NHS stop smoking service to get it. It's taken as one to two tablets a day. You should start taking it a week or two before you try to quit. A course of treatment usually lasts around 12 weeks, but it can be continued for longer if necessary. Who can use it Varenicline is safe for most people to take, although there are some situations when it's not recommended. For example, it's not suitable for: children under 18 years of age women who are pregnant or breastfeeding people with severe kidney problems Possible side effects Side effects of varenicline can include: feeling and being sick difficulty sleeping (insomnia), sometimes with vivid dreams dry mouth constipation or diarrhoea headaches drowsiness dizziness Speak to your GP if you experience any troublesome side effects. Bupropion (Zyban) Bupropion (brand name Zyban) is a medication originally used to treat depression, but it has since been found to help people quit smoking. It's not clear exactly how it works, but it's thought to have an effect on the parts of the brain involved in addictive behaviour. Where to get it and how to use it Bupropion is only available on prescription, so you'll usually need to see your GP or contact an NHS stop smoking service to get it. It's taken as one to two tablets a day. You should start taking it a week or two before you try to quit. A course of treatment usually lasts around seven to nine weeks. Who can use it Bupropion is safe for most people to take, although there are some situations when it's not recommended. For example, it's not suitable for: children under 18 years of age women who are pregnant or breastfeeding people with epilepsy, bipolar disorder or eating disorders Possible side effects  Side effects of bupropion can include: dry mouth  difficulty sleeping (insomnia) headaches feeling and being sick constipation difficulty concentrating dizziness Speak to your GP if you experience any troublesome side effects. E-cigarettes An e-cigarette is an electronic device that delivers nicotine in a vapour. This allows you to inhale nicotine without most of the harmful effects of smoking, as the vapour contains no tar or carbon monoxide. Research has found that e-cigarettes can help you give up smoking, so you may want to try them rather than the medications listed above. As with other approaches, they're most effective if used with support from an NHS stop smoking service. There are no e-cigarettes currently available on prescription. But once medicinally licensed e-cigarette products become available, GPs and stop smoking services will be able to prescribe them. For now, if you want to use an e-cigarette to help you quit, you'll have to buy one. Costs of e-cigarettes can vary, but generally they're much cheaper than cigarettes. Read more about e-cigarettes. Page last reviewed: 19\/07\/2016 Next review due: 19\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 212 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Compare your options Treatment options for quitting smoking Read more about the treatment options for quitting smoking Useful links NHS Choices links Stop smoking advice Stop smoking in pregnancy Electronic cigarettes Find stop smoking services External links Smokefree Action on Smoking and Health (ASH) Get help now to stop smoking Six practical, quick and simple steps you can take NOW to quit smoking Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Night sweats","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/night-sweats","content":"Night sweats (nocturnal hyperhidrosis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Night sweats  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Night sweats Introduction  People who suffer night sweats will typically wake in the night to find their bedclothes and bedding drenched, even if their bedroom temperature is cool. This abnormal sweating is annoying, but usually harmless. However, night sweats can sometimes be a sign of an underlying medical condition, so you should see your GP if they keep happening and you're worried. In the meantime, you can get a better idea of the possible cause of your night sweats by reading on. However, you should not use this page to diagnose yourself with a condition \u2013 always leave that to your doctor. The medical term for night sweats is nocturnal hyperhidrosis, which literally means \"night-time excessive sweating\". What is the likely cause? The main conditions and medications that can cause night sweats are summarised below, although it should be noted that many of these conditions would cause other more specific symptoms as well: the menopause obstructive sleep apnoea \u2013 a condition that causes interrupted breathing during sleep  medication \u2013 antidepressants and some other psychiatric drugs can sometimes cause night sweats as a side effect, as can aspirin and the steroid drug prednisolone alcohol abuse or drug misuse \u2013 especially the use of heroin hypoglycaemia (low blood sugar), which is commonly associated with diabetes and taking insulin   infections \u2013 tuberculosis is the most common infection associated with night sweats, but sweating may also be caused by other infections, including endocarditis (inflammation of the heart valves), osteomyelitis (a bone infection), abscesses and HIV\/AIDS cancer \u2013 night sweats can be an early symptom of certain cancers, such as lymphoma or leukaemia; however, this is unusual and cancer would cause other symptoms too, such as unintentional weight loss hormone disorders such as pheochromocytoma and carcinoid syndrome (tumours that cause the body to overproduce hormones) and an overactive thyroid gland gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) \u2013  where stomach acid leaks out of the stomach and into the gullet, although night sweats are not a common symptom of this  There may not be an identifiable cause for your night sweats, and it may just be an annoyance that happens every now and then. When the cause is unknown, it is referred to as idiopathic hyperhidrosis. Excessive sweating People who generally sweat excessively, day and night, may have a condition called hyperhidrosis. Hyperhidrosis doesn't usually pose a serious threat to a person\u2019s health, but it can be embarrassing and distressing. Many people with the condition are too embarrassed to seek medical help or believe that nothing can be done to improve their symptoms. However, help is available \u2013 for example, lifestyle changes and a prescription antiperspirant may improve your sweating.  Read more about hyperhidrosis. Page last reviewed: 18\/10\/2014 Next review due: 18\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 906 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 331  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 291  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) Sleep apnoea Menopause Better sleep External links British Sleep Society The Hyperhidrosis Support Group Night terrors and nightmares The difference between the two and advice on what to do NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Night terrors","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/night-terrors","content":"Night terrors and nightmares - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Night terrors and nightmares  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Night terrors Introduction  Many children experience nightmares and night terrors, but most grow out of them. They don't cause any long-term psychological harm to your child. Night terrors are very different from nightmares. A child having night terrors may scream and thrash around, and may not recognise you if you try to comfort them. This behaviour occurs on waking abruptly from deep, non-dream sleep. Your child won't be fully awake during these episodes and will have no memory of it the next morning. Nightmares occur from dream sleep (REM sleep). Your child may wake up from the nightmare and, depending on their age, may be able to remember and describe the bad dream to you. Both night terrors and nightmares in children are described in more detail below, along with advice about what you should do. Night terrors Night terrors are common in children aged between three and eight years. A child who experiences night terrors may scream, shout and thrash around in extreme panic, and may even jump out of bed. Their eyes will be open but they're not fully awake. The episodes usually occur in the early part of the night, continue for several minutes (up to 15 minutes) and sometimes occur more than once during the night. Why they happen Night terrors are more common in children with a family history of night terrors or sleepwalking behaviour. A night terror attack may be triggered by anything that: increases how much deep sleep your child has, such as tiredness, fever or certain types of medication makes your child more likely to wake from deep sleep, such as excitement, anxiety, sudden noise or a full bladder What you should do The best thing to do if your child is having an episode of night terrors is to stay calm and wait until they calm down. Don't intervene or interact with them, unless they're not safe. Night terrors can be frightening to witness, but they don't harm your child. You shouldn't attempt to wake your child when they're having an episode. They may not recognise you and may become more agitated if you try to comfort them. After the episode has ended, it's safe to wake your child. If necessary, encourage them to use the toilet before settling them back to sleep. If your child returns quickly into deep sleep, they may have another episode. Making sure they're fully awake before they go back to sleep can break this cycle. Your child won't remember the episode the next morning, but it may still help to have a general chat to find out if anything is worrying them and triggering the episodes. It will also help if they have a relaxing bedtime routine. Try not to discuss the episodes with your child in a way that worries them as this may increase their anxiety. If the night terror episodes are frequent and occur at a specific time every night, you may find that waking your child breaks the cycle. Wake your child 15 minutes before the anticipated time of the episode every night for seven days. This can disrupt their sleep pattern enough to stop the episodes without affecting sleep quality. When you should seek help Most children eventually grow out of night terrors. However, talk to your GP if they're occurring several times a night or occurring most nights. Your GP will be able to check whether something that's easily treatable is causing the episodes. For example, large tonsils could be causing breathing problems at night and waking your child. In a small number of children who have frequent episodes of night terrors, referral to a specialist service may be needed.  Nightmares Nightmares are common in children aged three to six years. Most children grow out of them. Nightmares usually occur later in the night and cause strong feelings of terror, fear, distress or anxiety. Your child may wake up and be able to remember and describe the dream to you. Nightmares in children can be caused by a frightening experience, such as watching a scary film, or by something that's worrying them. What you should do Talk to your child to find out whether anything is worrying them that could be triggering their nightmares. As with night terrors, making sure your child has a relaxing bedtime routine will also help. Take your child to see your GP if they're having repeated nightmares (a series of nightmares with a recurring theme). If your child's nightmares are being caused by a stressful past experience, they may need counselling. Nightmares in adults Nightmares and night terrors are usually associated with children, but they can sometimes also affect adults. There are many possible causes of adult nightmares, but they\u2019re often linked to stress, trauma or an existing mental health condition. They can also occur after taking certain types of medication, such as antidepressants. Sometimes, a condition that affects sleep can be a trigger for night terrors. For example: obstructive sleep apnoea  restless legs syndrome  migraines  Nightmares don\u2019t usually cause any physical harm, but they can be disturbing or upsetting. They may also prevent you getting a good night\u2019s sleep. See your GP if you\u2019re having regular nightmares that are affecting your sleep and day-to-day life. If your nightmares are caused by a particular traumatic event, your GP may recommend psychological treatment, such as counselling. Page last reviewed: 04\/10\/2015 Next review due: 04\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 417 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 203  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Children's sleep Sleepwalking Stress, anxiety and depression External links KidsHealth: nightmares KidsHealth: night terrors Children's sleep Get advice on dealing with common sleep problems affecting babies, children and teenagers Sleep problems in young children How to deal with sleep problems in young children, including frequent waking and nightmares NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nightmares","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/night-terrors","content":"Night terrors and nightmares - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Night terrors and nightmares  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Night terrors Introduction  Many children experience nightmares and night terrors, but most grow out of them. They don't cause any long-term psychological harm to your child. Night terrors are very different from nightmares. A child having night terrors may scream and thrash around, and may not recognise you if you try to comfort them. This behaviour occurs on waking abruptly from deep, non-dream sleep. Your child won't be fully awake during these episodes and will have no memory of it the next morning. Nightmares occur from dream sleep (REM sleep). Your child may wake up from the nightmare and, depending on their age, may be able to remember and describe the bad dream to you. Both night terrors and nightmares in children are described in more detail below, along with advice about what you should do. Night terrors Night terrors are common in children aged between three and eight years. A child who experiences night terrors may scream, shout and thrash around in extreme panic, and may even jump out of bed. Their eyes will be open but they're not fully awake. The episodes usually occur in the early part of the night, continue for several minutes (up to 15 minutes) and sometimes occur more than once during the night. Why they happen Night terrors are more common in children with a family history of night terrors or sleepwalking behaviour. A night terror attack may be triggered by anything that: increases how much deep sleep your child has, such as tiredness, fever or certain types of medication makes your child more likely to wake from deep sleep, such as excitement, anxiety, sudden noise or a full bladder What you should do The best thing to do if your child is having an episode of night terrors is to stay calm and wait until they calm down. Don't intervene or interact with them, unless they're not safe. Night terrors can be frightening to witness, but they don't harm your child. You shouldn't attempt to wake your child when they're having an episode. They may not recognise you and may become more agitated if you try to comfort them. After the episode has ended, it's safe to wake your child. If necessary, encourage them to use the toilet before settling them back to sleep. If your child returns quickly into deep sleep, they may have another episode. Making sure they're fully awake before they go back to sleep can break this cycle. Your child won't remember the episode the next morning, but it may still help to have a general chat to find out if anything is worrying them and triggering the episodes. It will also help if they have a relaxing bedtime routine. Try not to discuss the episodes with your child in a way that worries them as this may increase their anxiety. If the night terror episodes are frequent and occur at a specific time every night, you may find that waking your child breaks the cycle. Wake your child 15 minutes before the anticipated time of the episode every night for seven days. This can disrupt their sleep pattern enough to stop the episodes without affecting sleep quality. When you should seek help Most children eventually grow out of night terrors. However, talk to your GP if they're occurring several times a night or occurring most nights. Your GP will be able to check whether something that's easily treatable is causing the episodes. For example, large tonsils could be causing breathing problems at night and waking your child. In a small number of children who have frequent episodes of night terrors, referral to a specialist service may be needed.  Nightmares Nightmares are common in children aged three to six years. Most children grow out of them. Nightmares usually occur later in the night and cause strong feelings of terror, fear, distress or anxiety. Your child may wake up and be able to remember and describe the dream to you. Nightmares in children can be caused by a frightening experience, such as watching a scary film, or by something that's worrying them. What you should do Talk to your child to find out whether anything is worrying them that could be triggering their nightmares. As with night terrors, making sure your child has a relaxing bedtime routine will also help. Take your child to see your GP if they're having repeated nightmares (a series of nightmares with a recurring theme). If your child's nightmares are being caused by a stressful past experience, they may need counselling. Nightmares in adults Nightmares and night terrors are usually associated with children, but they can sometimes also affect adults. There are many possible causes of adult nightmares, but they\u2019re often linked to stress, trauma or an existing mental health condition. They can also occur after taking certain types of medication, such as antidepressants. Sometimes, a condition that affects sleep can be a trigger for night terrors. For example: obstructive sleep apnoea  restless legs syndrome  migraines  Nightmares don\u2019t usually cause any physical harm, but they can be disturbing or upsetting. They may also prevent you getting a good night\u2019s sleep. See your GP if you\u2019re having regular nightmares that are affecting your sleep and day-to-day life. If your nightmares are caused by a particular traumatic event, your GP may recommend psychological treatment, such as counselling. Page last reviewed: 04\/10\/2015 Next review due: 04\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 417 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 203  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Children's sleep Sleepwalking Stress, anxiety and depression External links KidsHealth: nightmares KidsHealth: night terrors Children's sleep Get advice on dealing with common sleep problems affecting babies, children and teenagers Sleep problems in young children How to deal with sleep problems in young children, including frequent waking and nightmares NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nipple discharge","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nipple-discharge","content":"Nipple discharge - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nipple discharge  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview nipple-discharge Clinical trials nipple-discharge Nipple discharge Introduction  Nipple discharge can be caused by a wide range of conditions, most of which are harmless or easily treated. Some of the main causes of nipple discharge are described below. See your GP if you're unsure of the cause of your discharge or you're embarrassed or worried, especially if the discharge is bloodstained or clear and only comes from one nipple, or if you're a man with nipple discharge. Pregnancy For women, one of the most obvious explanations for fluid leaking from the nipple is that you're pregnant or currently breastfeeding, as this can cause a milky discharge to come from both nipples. In pregnancy, the breasts may start to produce milk from as early as the second trimester, and some women continue to produce milk up to two years after stopping breastfeeding. If you think you may be pregnant, you can do a pregnancy test. You may also find the article Am I pregnant? helpful. Non-pregnancy causes If pregnancy has been ruled out, it's likely that your nipple discharge is caused by one of the following conditions: duct papilloma \u2013 a harmless growth inside your breast duct (the tube that carries milk from the gland to the nipple) that typically causes bloodstained discharge from one breast duct ectasia \u2013 a harmless, age-related breast change that can result in a cheesy or discoloured discharge from both breasts  breast or nipple abscess \u2013 a painful collection of pus forming in the breast tissue or around the nipple, usually as a result of bacterial infection These conditions are explained in more detail below, to give you a better idea of whether you may be affected. However, it's important to see your GP for a proper diagnosis so a more serious cause such as breast cancer can be ruled out. Duct papilloma If the discharge is bloodstained and from a single breast, the cause is likely to be a duct papilloma. A papilloma is a harmless wart-like growth, usually about 1-2cm in size, found inside one of the breast ducts. The papilloma is usually just behind the nipple and can cause fluid or blood to seep out of the nipple.  You'll usually just have one papilloma, and a simple procedure to remove it will often be recommended. Although the discharge may be alarming, rest assured that papilloma is not cancer and is very unlikely to turn into cancer. Duct ectasia If the discharge is brown, green or cheesy, it's likely you have a harmless condition called duct ectasia. Duct ectasia tends to affect women approaching the menopause. As the breasts age, the milk ducts behind the nipple get shorter and wider, and may produce a discharge. This is a normal, age-related change and nothing to worry about. A lump can sometimes be felt behind the nipple, which is just scar tissue or perhaps a dilated duct, and the nipple sometimes becomes inverted. This condition is harmless and tends to clear up without treatment. It doesn't increase your risk of developing breast cancer in the future. However, it's important to go back to your GP if you develop any new symptoms. An abscess If the discharge contains pus, the cause will probably be a breast abscess or abscess around the nipple. The surrounding skin will be red, warm and swollen. Breast abscesses are often linked to mastitis \u2013 a condition that causes breast pain and swelling (inflammation) and usually affects women who are breastfeeding. If you have been to see your GP because of mastitis, you may already have been given antibiotics. If your breast is still hard, red and painful, your GP should refer you to a specialist to check for a breast abscess. If the diagnosis is confirmed, a simple procedure to drain the abscess may be recommended. Read more about treating breast abscesses. More unusual causes Less common causes of nipple discharge are: the contraceptive pill \u2013 discharge can be a temporary side effect of starting the pill (some women also get breast tenderness and breast enlargement) fluctuating hormones from puberty or the menopause previous breastfeeding \u2013 some women continue to produce milk up to two years after they've stopped breastfeeding   stimulation of the nipples \u2013 for example, through sex medication that causes raised levels of the milk-producing hormone prolactin \u2013 this includes SSRI antidepressants and tranquillisers a type of non-cancerous brain tumour called a prolactinoma, which causes raised levels of prolactin a hormone problem \u2013 such as an underactive thyroid gland or Cushing's syndrome a clogged milk duct called a galactocele \u2013 which is usually associated with childbirth and can cause a milky or creamy discharge along with a painless lump an early form of breast cancer called carcinoma in situ, which is found inside the milk ducts and hasn't yet spread (it's usually picked up during breast cancer screening) Is it breast cancer? In the vast majority of cases, nipple discharge isn't a sign of breast cancer. However, discharge from the breast can very occasionally be a symptom of cancer, so it's not something you should ever ignore. Nipple discharge is more likely to be a symptom of cancer if: you also have a breast lump or changes to the skin of your breast the discharge is bloody and only comes from one nipple the discharge occurs without any pressure on your breast or nipple you're over 50 See your GP if you're worried you might have breast cancer. While this is unlikely, it's best to be sure by getting a proper diagnosis. Read more about the symptoms of breast cancer and how breast cancer is diagnosed. Page last reviewed: 07\/04\/2015 Next review due: 07\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 241 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 118  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breast abscess Breast lump Breast pain Mastitis Pregnancy and baby guide External links Breakthrough Breast Cancer Breast Cancer Care Breast lumps Breast lumps are common and have a number of different causes. Most lumps are not cancerous, but should be checked by a GP as soon as possible Breast pain Up to two-thirds of women in the UK will experience breast pain at some point. Learn about the causes, and what can be done NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nits","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Head-lice","content":"Head lice and nits - NHS Choices View a new version of this page Yes Tell us what you think No thanks Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Head lice and nits  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Head-lice Clinical trials Head lice and nits Head-lice Detection Head-lice Treatment   Head lice are tiny insects that live in hair. Nits are the empty egg cases attached to hair that head lice hatch from. Head lice are a common problem, particularly in school children aged 4-11. They're largely harmless, but can live in the hair for a long time if not treated and can be irritating and frustrating to deal with. This page covers: Spotting head lice Getting rid of head lice and nits How you get head lice Prevention How to spot head lice Head lice can be difficult to spot, even when the head is closely inspected. They're very small whitish or grey-brown insects that range from the size of a pinhead to the size of a sesame seed. The only way to be sure someone has head lice is to find a live louse by combing their hair with a special fine-toothed comb. This is called detection combing. Less reliable signs of head lice include: small white eggs or nits (egg cases) in the hair behind the ears or at back of the neck \u2013 see image above an itchy scalp a rash on the back of the neck feeling as though something is moving in the hair How to get rid of head lice and nits Treatments to get rid of head lice are available to buy from pharmacies, supermarkets and online. You don't usually need to see your GP. The main treatments are: lotions or sprays that kill head lice \u2013 these can be very effective, but some aren't suitable for pregnant or breastfeeding women, or for children under two removing head lice with a specially designed comb \u2013 this is suitable for everyone and relatively inexpensive, but needs to be repeated several times and can take a long time to do thoroughly A pharmacist can advise you about the treatments available if you're not sure which is best for you or your child. Make sure you carefully follow the instructions that come with the treatment you choose. Read more about the treatments for head lice. How you get head lice Head lice are spread by direct head to head contact. They climb from one person's hair to another's. Head lice: can't fly, jump or swim are very unlikely to be spread by objects such as hats, combs and pillows don't have a preference for dirty, clean, short or long hair only affect people and can't be caught from animals Once detached from the hair, head lice will usually die within 12-24 hours. Preventing head lice It's very difficult to prevent head lice. You may want to consider regular detection combing \u2013 for example, on a weekly basis \u2013 if you're concerned about your children or yourself. Lotions and sprays don't prevent head lice and should only be used if a live louse has been found in your or your child's hair. Staying off work or school and washing clothing and bedding on a hot wash is unnecessary, as it's unlikely to help prevent the spread of head lice. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/05\/2016 Next review due: 17\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 620 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 343  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 143  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful How do I check for and treat headlice? Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Paediatrician Chloe Macaulay describes how to check for and treat headlice. Media last reviewed: 10\/02\/2015 Next review due: 10\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Insect bites Child health 6-15 Your child at school External links British Association of Dermatologists: head lice (PDF, 242kb) Community Hygiene Concern: bug busting KidsHealth: head lice Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nocturnal enuresis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Bedwetting","content":"Bedwetting - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bedwetting  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Bedwetting Clinical trials Bedwetting Bedwetting Symptoms Bedwetting Causes Bedwetting Diagnosis Bedwetting Treatment Introduction  Bedwetting (nocturnal enuresis) can be worrying and frustrating, but it's common for children to accidentally wet the bed during the night. The problem usually resolves in time. Bedwetting is common in young children but it gets less common as a child gets older. In the UK, it's estimated that about: 1 in 12 children wet the bed regularly at four and a half years old (regularly is defined as at least twice a week) 1 in 40 children wet the bed regularly at seven and a half years old 1 in 65 children wet the bed regularly at nine and a half years old About 1 in 100 people continue to wet the bed into adulthood. Bedwetting is slightly more common in boys than girls. When to see your GP Bedwetting is only really a problem if it begins to bother the children or parents. Only rarely will this be considered a problem in children under 5 years old. Many families first seek treatment when the bedwetting affects a child's social life (for example, preventing sleepovers). Medical treatments aren't usually recommended for children under five (although exceptions can be made if a child finds bedwetting particularly upsetting). If your child frequently wets the bed and finds it upsetting, speak to your GP for advice. Read more about the symptoms of bedwetting. Why does my child wet the bed?  There's usually no obvious reason why children wet the bed and it's not your child's fault. In many cases, the problem runs in families. Bedwetting could be caused by your child: producing more urine than their bladder can cope with having an overactive bladder, meaning it can only hold a small amount of urine being a very deep sleeper so they don't react to the signals telling their brain their bladder is full Constipation is frequently associated with bedwetting, especially in children who don't wet themselves every night. In these cases, bedwetting may happen during the night when the child has not had a poo during the day. Sometimes, treating constipation is all that's needed to treat bedwetting. Untreated constipation makes any treatment of bedwetting much harder. Occasionally, bedwetting can be triggered by emotional distress, such as being bullied or moving to a new school. In rare cases, bedwetting may be the symptom of an underlying health condition, such as type 1 diabetes. Read more about the causes of bedwetting and diagnosing bedwetting. Treating bedwetting The recommended plan is usually to try a few measures yourself first, such as limiting the amount of liquid your child drinks in the evening, and making sure they go to the toilet before going to sleep. Reassuring your child that everything is okay is also important. Don't tell them off or punish them for wetting the bed as this won't help and could make the problem worse. It's important for them to know they're not alone, and it will get better. If these measures alone don't help, a bedwetting alarm is often recommended. These are moisture-sensitive pads a child wears on their night clothes. An alarm sounds if the child begins to pee. Over time, the alarm should help train a child to wake once their bladder is full. If an alarm doesn't work or is unsuitable, medication called desmopressin or oxybutinin can be used.  Most children respond well to treatment, although bedwetting sometimes returns temporarily. Read more about treating bedwetting. ERIC Education and Resources for Improving Childhood Continence (ERIC) is a UK-based charity for people affected by bedwetting. The charity\u2019s website provides useful information and advice for both children and parents. ERIC also has a telephone helpline \u2013 0845 370 8008, open weekdays from 10am to 4pm. Bedwetting in adults About 1 in 100 people continue to wet the bed into adulthood, and some people only begin to wet the bed as an adult. This usually requires referral to a specialist such as an urologist (a specialist in treating conditions that affect the urinary system) or an incontinence adviser. Read more about urinary incontinence, bedwetting in adults and bedwetting in teenagers. Page last reviewed: 27\/03\/2015 Next review due: 27\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 192 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Child health 6-15 Potty training tips Type 1 diabetes Incontinence Urinary tract infections Constipation External links NICE guidelines: managing bedwetting ERIC: bedwetting support Bladder and Bowel Foundation: nocturnal enuresis Child health 6-15 Information on child health, including healthy diet, fitness, sex education and exam stress How to potty train Learn the signs that your child may be ready to start potty training, and how to teach your child to use a potty NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Noise intolerance (hyperacusis)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/hyperacusis","content":"Hyperacusis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hyperacusis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview hyperacusis Clinical trials Hyperacusis Introduction  Hyperacusis is the name for intolerance to everyday sounds that causes significant distress and affects a person's day-to-day activities. The condition can vary quite a lot. For example, some people find loud noises extremely uncomfortable, some find certain noises particularly annoying, some develop a fear of certain noises, while others experience pain when hearing ordinary sounds. Hyperacusis affects people of all ages and is quite common in children. The condition may just be a minor nuisance for some, but for many it can have a major impact on their life. This page covers: Symptoms of hyperacusis When to get medical help Treatments for hyperacusis Causes of hyperacusis Symptoms of hyperacusis Hyperacusis can either start suddenly or develop gradually over time. When someone with the condition hears noise, they may: feel uncomfortable cover their ears or try to get away from the noise feel angry, tense, distressed, or anxious experience pain \u2013 hyperacusis can be very painful for some people Some people become afraid of sound and avoid noisy situations, causing them to become socially isolated. School and work life can also suffer as it can be very difficult to concentrate. When to get medical help Visit your GP if you have a severe sound intolerance. They can examine your ears and refer you to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) consultant or a hearing specialist (audiologist) for tests if necessary. There are no tests that can definitively diagnose hyperacusis, but you may be asked to fill in a questionnaire about your symptoms and have a hearing test to determine what level of sound causes a reaction. Treatments for hyperacusis There are no specific medicines or operations that can treat hyperacusis, although treating any underlying cause may help resolve the problem. If there's no clear cause, specialist techniques to help reduce your sensitivity to noise may be recommended. These therapies are widely available privately, and may be available on the NHS for people with severe or persistent hyperacusis. They should only be carried out by someone specially trained in the correct techniques. Treatment may involve: cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) \u2013 this aims to help you explore and change the way you think about the troublesome noises to reduce distress, change your avoidance behaviour, and help you recover from your hyperacusis symptoms   counselling and education \u2013 to support you and help you learn more about your hyperacusis sound therapy (desensitisation) \u2013 this aims to help desensitise your hearing over several months, using special noise generators either placed in the room or in your ears (similar to hearing aids) lifestyle changes \u2013 including learning relaxation techniques, listening to calming music or sounds, not avoiding noisy situations, and not using earplugs or muffs (these may make your ears more sensitive) Recent research suggests patients often feel CBT, counselling and education are the most effective treatments. Some people also found sound therapy helpful, but it wasn't clear whether it provided any additional benefit. You may also find it helpful to get in touch with a support group, such as the British Tinnitus Association and Action on Hearing Loss, to talk to other people with hyperacusis and share your experiences. Causes of hyperacusis The cause of hyperacusis is unclear. It has been linked with a number of other conditions, although many people with hyperacusis don't have any other obvious problems. Hyperacusis has been associated with: tinnitus \u2013 hearing sounds that come from inside your body, rather than from an outside source hearing loss \u2013 the brain may sometimes compensate for reduced hearing by amplifying signals coming from the ears damage to the ear or brain \u2013 including from a head injury, ear surgery, exposure to loud noise, earwax removal, glue ear, and persistent ear infections migraines Bell's palsy \u2013 a type of facial paralysis Ménière's disease \u2013 a disorder of the inner ear that causes a spinning sensation (vertigo), tinnitus, and hearing loss depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Addison's disease \u2013 a rare disorder of the adrenal glands, which sit near the kidneys and produce important hormones disorders affecting the brain \u2013 such as Williams' syndrome or autism spectrum disorder Hyperacusis can also be a side effect of certain medications. If you're taking any medication, check the leaflet it comes with to see if hyperacusis is listed as a possible side effect. Page last reviewed: 07\/03\/2016 Next review due: 07\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 330 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 74  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 182  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hearing problems Tinnitus Find audiology services External links British Tinnitus Association: hyperacusis Action on Hearing Loss: hyperacusis (PDF, 180kb) Hyperacusis Research Protect your ears Loud music at events can cause lasting damage to your hearing. Find out how to avoid an ear bashing Get your hearing tested If you're worried about your hearing, it's easy to get it checked. Read our guide to hearing tests Find audiology services Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/fatty-liver-disease","content":"Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview fatty-liver-disease Clinical trials fatty-liver-disease Community Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease Introduction  Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the term for a range of conditions caused by a build-up of fat in the liver. It's usually seen in people who are overweight or obese. A healthy liver should contain little or no fat. It's estimated that up to one in every three people in the UK has early stages of NAFLD where there are small amounts of fat in their liver. Early-stage NAFLD doesn't usually cause any harm, but it can lead to serious liver damage, including cirrhosis, if it gets worse. Having high levels of fat in your liver is also associated with an increased risk of problems such as diabetes, heart attacks and strokes. If detected and managed at an early stage, it's possible to stop NAFLD getting worse and reduce the amount of fat in your liver. This page covers: Stages of NAFLD Am I at risk of NAFLD? Symptoms of NAFLD How NAFLD is diagnosed Treatment for NAFLD Stages of NAFLD NAFLD develops in four main stages. Most people will only ever develop the first stage, usually without realising it. In small number of cases it can progress and eventually lead to liver damage if not detected and managed. The main stages of NAFLD are: simple fatty liver (steatosis) \u2013 a largely harmless build-up of fat in the liver cells that may only be diagnosed during tests carried out for another reason non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) \u2013 a more serious form of NAFLD, where the liver has become inflamed; this is estimated to affect up to 5% of the UK population fibrosis \u2013 where persistent inflammation causes scar tissue around the liver and nearby blood vessels, but the liver is still able to function normally cirrhosis \u2013 the most severe stage, occurring after years of inflammation, where the liver shrinks and becomes scarred and lumpy; this damage is permanent and can lead to liver failure (where your liver stops working properly) and liver cancer It can take years for fibrosis or cirrhosis to develop. It's important to make lifestyle changes to prevent the disease from getting worse. Am I at risk of NAFLD? You're at an increased risk of NAFLD if you: are obese or overweight \u2013 particularly if you have a lot of fat around your waist (an \"apple-like\" body shape) have type 2 diabetes have high blood pressure have high cholesterol are over the age of 50 smoke However, NAFLD has been diagnosed in people without any of these risk factors, including young children. Although it's very similar to alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD), NAFLD isn't caused by drinking too much alcohol. Symptoms of NAFLD There aren't usually any symptoms of NAFLD in the early stages. You probably won't know you have it unless it's diagnosed during tests carried out for another reason. Occasionally, people with NASH or fibrosis (more advanced stages of the disease) may experience: a dull or aching pain in the top right of the tummy (over the lower right side of the ribs) fatigue (extreme tiredness) unexplained weight loss weakness If cirrhosis (the most advanced stage) develops, you can get more severe symptoms such as yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice), itchy skin, and swelling in the legs, ankles, feet or tummy. Read more about the symptoms of cirrhosis. How NAFLD is diagnosed NAFLD is often diagnosed after a blood test called a liver function test produces an abnormal result and other liver conditions, such as hepatitis, are ruled out. However, blood tests don't always pick up NAFLD. The condition may also be spotted during an ultrasound scan of your tummy. This is a type of scan where sound waves are used to create an image of the inside of your body. If you're diagnosed with NAFLD, further tests may be needed to determine which stage you have. This may involve a special blood test or having another type of ultrasound scan (Fibroscan). Some people may also need a small sample of liver tissue (biopsy) taken using a needle to have it analysed in a laboratory. Treatment for NAFLD Most people with NAFLD won't develop any serious problems, but if you're diagnosed with the condition it's a good idea to take steps to stop it getting any worse. There's currently no specific medication for NAFLD, but making healthy lifestyle choices can help and treatment may be recommended for associated conditions (high blood pressure, diabetes and cholesterol) or complications. You may be advised to have regular appointments with your doctor to check your liver function and look for signs of any new problems. Healthy diet and lifestyle Adopting a healthy lifestyle is the main way of managing NAFLD. The following can all help:  Lose weight \u2013 you should aim for a BMI of 18.5-24.9; use the BMI calculator to work out your BMI. Losing more than 10% of your weight can remove some fat from the liver and improve NASH if you have it. Eat a healthy diet \u2013 try to have a balanced diet high in fruits, vegetables, protein and carbohydrates, but low in fat, sugar and salt. Eating smaller portions of food can help too. Exercise regularly \u2013 aim to do at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity activity, such as walking or cycling, a week. All types of exercise can help improve NAFLD, even if you don't lose weight. Stop smoking \u2013 if you smoke, stopping can help reduce your risk of problems such as heart attacks and strokes. NAFLD isn't caused by alcohol, but drinking may make the condition worse. It's therefore advisable to cut down or stop drinking alcohol. Read some tips on cutting down on alcohol. Medication There isn't currently any medication that can treat NAFLD, but various medicines can be useful in managing the problems associated with the condition. For example, your doctor may recommend medication to treat high blood pressure, treat high cholesterol, treat type 2 diabetes and\/or treat obesity. Liver transplant If you develop severe cirrhosis and your liver stops working properly, you may need to be put on the waiting list for a liver transplant. For adults, the average waiting time for a liver transplant is 145 days for transplants from recently deceased donors. Alternatively, it may be possible to have a transplant using a section of liver removed from a living donor. As the liver can regenerate itself, both the transplanted section and the remaining section of the donor's liver are able to regrow to a normal size. Read more about liver transplants.  Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 814 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 396  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 229  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol-related liver disease Obesity Type 2 diabetes Cirrhosis External links British Liver Trust: NAFLD Lab Tests Online UK: liver function tests Start losing weight Begin your weight loss journey today with these practical tips, including how to handle snack time and how to fit in more physical activity Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/fatty-liver-disease","content":"Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview fatty-liver-disease Clinical trials fatty-liver-disease Community Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease Introduction  Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the term for a range of conditions caused by a build-up of fat in the liver. It's usually seen in people who are overweight or obese. A healthy liver should contain little or no fat. It's estimated that up to one in every three people in the UK has early stages of NAFLD where there are small amounts of fat in their liver. Early-stage NAFLD doesn't usually cause any harm, but it can lead to serious liver damage, including cirrhosis, if it gets worse. Having high levels of fat in your liver is also associated with an increased risk of problems such as diabetes, heart attacks and strokes. If detected and managed at an early stage, it's possible to stop NAFLD getting worse and reduce the amount of fat in your liver. This page covers: Stages of NAFLD Am I at risk of NAFLD? Symptoms of NAFLD How NAFLD is diagnosed Treatment for NAFLD Stages of NAFLD NAFLD develops in four main stages. Most people will only ever develop the first stage, usually without realising it. In small number of cases it can progress and eventually lead to liver damage if not detected and managed. The main stages of NAFLD are: simple fatty liver (steatosis) \u2013 a largely harmless build-up of fat in the liver cells that may only be diagnosed during tests carried out for another reason non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) \u2013 a more serious form of NAFLD, where the liver has become inflamed; this is estimated to affect up to 5% of the UK population fibrosis \u2013 where persistent inflammation causes scar tissue around the liver and nearby blood vessels, but the liver is still able to function normally cirrhosis \u2013 the most severe stage, occurring after years of inflammation, where the liver shrinks and becomes scarred and lumpy; this damage is permanent and can lead to liver failure (where your liver stops working properly) and liver cancer It can take years for fibrosis or cirrhosis to develop. It's important to make lifestyle changes to prevent the disease from getting worse. Am I at risk of NAFLD? You're at an increased risk of NAFLD if you: are obese or overweight \u2013 particularly if you have a lot of fat around your waist (an \"apple-like\" body shape) have type 2 diabetes have high blood pressure have high cholesterol are over the age of 50 smoke However, NAFLD has been diagnosed in people without any of these risk factors, including young children. Although it's very similar to alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD), NAFLD isn't caused by drinking too much alcohol. Symptoms of NAFLD There aren't usually any symptoms of NAFLD in the early stages. You probably won't know you have it unless it's diagnosed during tests carried out for another reason. Occasionally, people with NASH or fibrosis (more advanced stages of the disease) may experience: a dull or aching pain in the top right of the tummy (over the lower right side of the ribs) fatigue (extreme tiredness) unexplained weight loss weakness If cirrhosis (the most advanced stage) develops, you can get more severe symptoms such as yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice), itchy skin, and swelling in the legs, ankles, feet or tummy. Read more about the symptoms of cirrhosis. How NAFLD is diagnosed NAFLD is often diagnosed after a blood test called a liver function test produces an abnormal result and other liver conditions, such as hepatitis, are ruled out. However, blood tests don't always pick up NAFLD. The condition may also be spotted during an ultrasound scan of your tummy. This is a type of scan where sound waves are used to create an image of the inside of your body. If you're diagnosed with NAFLD, further tests may be needed to determine which stage you have. This may involve a special blood test or having another type of ultrasound scan (Fibroscan). Some people may also need a small sample of liver tissue (biopsy) taken using a needle to have it analysed in a laboratory. Treatment for NAFLD Most people with NAFLD won't develop any serious problems, but if you're diagnosed with the condition it's a good idea to take steps to stop it getting any worse. There's currently no specific medication for NAFLD, but making healthy lifestyle choices can help and treatment may be recommended for associated conditions (high blood pressure, diabetes and cholesterol) or complications. You may be advised to have regular appointments with your doctor to check your liver function and look for signs of any new problems. Healthy diet and lifestyle Adopting a healthy lifestyle is the main way of managing NAFLD. The following can all help:  Lose weight \u2013 you should aim for a BMI of 18.5-24.9; use the BMI calculator to work out your BMI. Losing more than 10% of your weight can remove some fat from the liver and improve NASH if you have it. Eat a healthy diet \u2013 try to have a balanced diet high in fruits, vegetables, protein and carbohydrates, but low in fat, sugar and salt. Eating smaller portions of food can help too. Exercise regularly \u2013 aim to do at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity activity, such as walking or cycling, a week. All types of exercise can help improve NAFLD, even if you don't lose weight. Stop smoking \u2013 if you smoke, stopping can help reduce your risk of problems such as heart attacks and strokes. NAFLD isn't caused by alcohol, but drinking may make the condition worse. It's therefore advisable to cut down or stop drinking alcohol. Read some tips on cutting down on alcohol. Medication There isn't currently any medication that can treat NAFLD, but various medicines can be useful in managing the problems associated with the condition. For example, your doctor may recommend medication to treat high blood pressure, treat high cholesterol, treat type 2 diabetes and\/or treat obesity. Liver transplant If you develop severe cirrhosis and your liver stops working properly, you may need to be put on the waiting list for a liver transplant. For adults, the average waiting time for a liver transplant is 145 days for transplants from recently deceased donors. Alternatively, it may be possible to have a transplant using a section of liver removed from a living donor. As the liver can regenerate itself, both the transplanted section and the remaining section of the donor's liver are able to regrow to a normal size. Read more about liver transplants.  Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2016 Next review due: 27\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 814 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 396  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 229  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol-related liver disease Obesity Type 2 diabetes Cirrhosis External links British Liver Trust: NAFLD Lab Tests Online UK: liver function tests Start losing weight Begin your weight loss journey today with these practical tips, including how to handle snack time and how to fit in more physical activity Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-allergic rhinitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Rhinitis---non-allergic","content":"Non-allergic rhinitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-allergic rhinitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Rhinitis---non-allergic Clinical trials Non-allergic rhinitis Rhinitis---non-allergic Causes Rhinitis---non-allergic Diagnosis Rhinitis---non-allergic Treatment Rhinitis---non-allergic Complications Introduction  Non-allergic rhinitis is inflammation of the inside of the nose that isn't caused by an allergy. Rhinitis caused by an allergen, such as pollen, is a separate condition known as allergic rhinitis. Symptoms of non-allergic rhinitis can include: a blocked nose a runny nose \u2013 this may be through the nostrils or down the back of the nose (catarrh) sneezing \u2013 although this is generally less severe than in allergic rhinitis mild irritation or discomfort in and around your nose reduced sense of smell In rare cases, non-allergic rhinitis can also cause a crust to develop inside the nose, which may: produce a foul-smelling odour cause bleeding if you try to remove it When to see your GP You should see your GP if you have symptoms of non-allergic rhinitis and the condition is affecting your quality of life. Non-allergic rhinitis can be difficult to diagnose, as there is no test to confirm the condition. Your GP will first ask about your symptoms and medical history. They may then carry out a blood test to check if you have an allergy, or they may refer you to a hospital clinic for more specific tests for allergies, including a \"skin prick test\". If the test results suggest you don't have an allergy, you may be diagnosed with non-allergic rhinitis. Read more about diagnosing non-allergic rhinitis. What causes non-allergic rhinitis? In non-allergic rhinitis, the inflammation is usually the result of swollen blood vessels and a build-up of fluid in the tissues of the nose. This swelling blocks the nasal passages and stimulates the mucus glands in the nose, resulting in the typical symptoms of a blocked or runny nose. There are several possible causes of non-allergic rhinitis, which can be divided into external or internal factors. External factors include: viral infections, such as a cold \u2013 these attack the lining of the nose and throat environmental factors \u2013 such as extreme temperatures, humidity or exposure to noxious fumes, such as smoke Internal factors include: hormone imbalances \u2013 such as those that occur during pregnancy or puberty hormone replacement therapy (HRT) or hormonal contraception Read more about the causes of non-allergic rhinitis. Treating non-allergic rhinitis Although non-allergic rhinitis isn't usually harmful, it can be irritating and affect your quality of life. The best treatment option depends on how severe the condition is and what's causing it. In some cases, avoiding certain triggers and undertaking self care measures, like rinsing your nasal passages, may relieve your symptoms. This can be done using either a homemade solution or a solution made with sachets of ingredients bought from a pharmacy.  In other cases, medication may be needed, such as a nasal spray containing corticosteroids. These will help to relieve the congestion, but usually need to be used over a number of weeks to be fully effective. Before taking any medication for non-allergic rhinitis, always check the leaflet that comes with it, as these treatments aren't suitable for everyone. If you're at all uncertain whether you should be using one of these medications, check with your GP or pharmacist. Read more about treating non-allergic rhinitis. Further problems In some cases, non-allergic rhinitis can lead to complications. These include: nasal polyps \u2013 abnormal, but non-cancerous (benign) sacs of fluid that grow inside the nasal passages and sinuses sinusitis \u2013 an infection caused by nasal inflammation and swelling that prevents mucus draining from the sinuses middle ear infections \u2013 infection of part of the ear located directly behind the eardrum These problems can often be treated with medication, although surgery is sometimes needed in severe or long-term cases. Read more about the complications of non-allergic rhinitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/03\/2016 Next review due: 29\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 302 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Allergic rhinitis Catarrh Decongestants Middle ear infections Nasal polyps Sinusitis External links British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology Home remedies for common conditions Get practical advice to deal with the 10 most common minor health conditions How your pharmacy can help Your local pharmacy is more than just a shop for medicines \u2013 it could save a trip to the GP NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-gonococcal urethritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/non_specific_urethritis","content":"Non-gonococcal urethritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-gonococcal urethritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Non_specific_urethritis Clinical trials Non-gonococcal urethritis Non_specific_urethritis Symptoms Non_specific_urethritis Causes Non_specific_urethritis Diagnosis Non_specific_urethritis Treatment Non_specific_urethritis Complications Non-gonococcal urethritis  Urethritis is inflammation of the urethra \u2013 the tube that carries urine from the bladder out of the body. It is usually caused by an infection. The term non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU) is used when the condition is not caused by gonorrhoea \u2013 a sexually transmitted infection (STI). NGU is sometimes referred to as non-specific urethritis (NSU) when no cause can be found. In women, NGU rarely has any symptoms. Symptoms in men include: a painful or burning sensation when urinating the tip of the penis feeling irritated and sore a white or cloudy discharge from the tip of the penis Read more about the symptoms of NGU. If you think you have NGU, you should visit your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic or sexual health clinic. These clinics have access to specialist diagnostic equipment that your GP may not have. It is easy to find sexual health services in your area. Sexual health services are free and available to everyone, regardless of age, sex, ethnic origin and sexual orientation. Why does NGU happen? NGU can have a number of possible causes, including irritation to the urethra and STIs. Chlamydia causes up to 43 out of 100 cases of NGU. There are many cases of NGU where no infection is found. If no cause is found, you will still be offered treatment for possible infection. This is also the case if inflammation is caused by an object such as a catheter in the urethra, or by using creams and soaps around the genitals. Read more about the causes of NGU. Who is affected? Urethritis is the most common condition diagnosed and treated among men in GUM clinics or sexual health clinics in the UK. There are around 80,000 men diagnosed with urethritis every year. It is more difficult to diagnose urethritis in women because it may not cause as many symptoms. NGU is usually diagnosed after urine and swab tests. Read more about diagnosing NGU. Treating NGU Antibiotics are usually prescribed to treat NGU. You may be given them before you get your test results. Antibiotics are also used in cases where NGU is thought to have been caused by an object, cream or soap. In most cases, only a short course of treatment is needed and symptoms clear up after about two weeks. The most common antibiotics used are azithromycin and doxycycline (Vibramycin-D). It is important that past and current sexual partners are also treated, to prevent any infection spreading to others. After treatment has been completed, and symptoms have disappeared, it should be safe to start having sex again. Read more about treating NGU. Preventing NGU As NGU is usually caused by an STI, practising safer sex is the best way to reduce the chances of it developing. Safer sex involves using barrier contraception, such as condoms, and having regular checks at sexual health clinics or GUMs. Read more about preventing NGU. Complications NGU can have some complications \u2013 for example, the condition can keep coming back. Other complications include: reactive arthritis \u2013 when the immune system starts attacking healthy tissue, which can lead to joint pain and conjunctivitis epididymo-orchitis \u2013 inflammation of the testicles Women often have no symptoms of NGU. However, if it's caused by chlamydia and left untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Repeated episodes of PID are associated with an increased risk of infertility. Read more about the complications of NGU.  Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 77 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Sexual health Chlamydia Gonorrhoea Sexually transmitted infections Why is my penis smelly and sore? Find sexual health services External links Avert: information about sex Brook: find a service FPA: non-specific urethritis Lab Tests Online UK: testing for a bacterial infection British Association for Sexual Health and HIV: guidelines Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-Hodgkin lymphoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/non-hodgkins-lymphoma","content":"Non-Hodgkin lymphoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-Hodgkin lymphoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview non-hodgkins-lymphoma Clinical trials Non-Hodgkin lymphoma non-hodgkins-lymphoma Symptoms non-hodgkins-lymphoma Causes non-hodgkins-lymphoma Diagnosis non-hodgkins-lymphoma Treatment non-hodgkins-lymphoma Complications Introduction  Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is an uncommon cancer that develops in the lymphatic system, which is a network of vessels and glands spread throughout your body. The lymphatic system is part of your immune system. Clear fluid called lymph flows through the lymphatic vessels and contains infection-fighting white blood cells known as lymphocytes. In non-Hodgkin lymphoma, the affected lymphocytes start to multiply in an abnormal way and begin to collect in certain parts of the lymphatic system, such as the lymph nodes (glands). The affected lymphocytes lose their infection-fighting properties, making you more vulnerable to infection. The most common symptom of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a painless swelling in a lymph node, usually in the neck, armpit or groin.  Read more about the symptoms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  Who's affected? In the UK, more than 12,000 people are diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma each year. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma can occur at any age, but your chances of developing the condition increase as you get older, with most cases diagnosed in people over 65. Slightly more men than women are affected. What causes non-Hodgkin lymphoma? The exact cause of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is unknown. However, your risk of developing the condition is increased if: you have a medical condition that weakens your immune system you take immunosuppressant medication you've previously been exposed to a common virus called the Epstein-Barr virus \u2013 which causes glandular fever You also have a slightly increased risk of developing non-Hodgkin lymphoma if a first-degree relative (such as a parent or sibling) has had the condition. Read more about the causes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. How non-Hodgkin lymphoma is diagnosed The only way to confirm a diagnosis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is by carrying out a biopsy. This is a minor surgical procedure where a sample of affected lymph node tissue is removed and studied in a laboratory. Read more about diagnosing non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Treatment and outlook There are many subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, but they can generally be put into one of two broad categories: high-grade or aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma \u2013 where the cancer develops quickly and aggressively low-grade or indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma \u2013 where the cancer develops slowly, and you may not experience any symptoms for many years The outlook for non-Hodgkin lymphoma varies greatly, depending on the exact type, grade and extent of the lymphoma, and the person\u2019s age. Low-grade tumours don't necessarily require immediate medical treatment, but are harder to completely cure. High-grade lymphomas need to be treated straight away, but tend to respond much better to treatment and can often be cured.  The main treatments used for non-Hodgkin lymphoma are: chemotherapy radiotherapy  a type of targeted treatment called monoclonal antibody therapy Overall, most cases of non-Hodgkin lymphoma are considered very treatable. You can read more detailed information about the outlook for non-Hodgkin lymphoma on the Cancer Research UK website. However, there's a risk of long-term problems after treatment, including infertility and an increased risk of developing another type of cancer in the future. Read more about:  treating non-Hodgkin lymphoma  complications of non-Hodgkin lymphoma Information about you If you have non-Hodgkin lymphoma, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/11\/2015 Next review due: 03\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 261 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is the most common type of lymphoma in the UK, with more than 12,000 people diagnosed each year. An expert describes the symptoms, and Maureen talks about her experience of living with the condition. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Hodgkin lymphoma Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Bone marrow transplant Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Macmillan: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Bloodwise: non-Hodgkin lymphoma Lymphoma Association Cancer care choices for young people Find out more about the cancer care options available for young people aged between 19 and 24. Flu and the flu vaccine Your guide to flu symptoms and the flu vaccine, including who should be vaccinated this winter NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-insulin-dependent diabetes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Diabetes-type2","content":"Type 2 diabetes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Type 2 diabetes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Diabetes-type2 Real stories Diabetes-type2 Clinical trials Diabetes-type2 Community Diabetes-type2 Type 2 diabetes Diabetes-type2 Symptoms Diabetes-type2 Causes Diabetes-type2 Diagnosis Diabetes-type2 Treatment Diabetes-type2 Complications Diabetes-type2 Living with   Diabetes is a lifelong condition that causes a person's blood sugar level to become too high. The hormone insulin \u2013 produced by the pancreas \u2013 is responsible for controlling the amount of glucose in the blood There are two main types of diabetes: type 1 \u2013 where the pancreas doesn't produce any insulin type 2 \u2013 where the pancreas doesn't produce enough insulin or the body's cells don't react to insulin These pages are about type 2 diabetes. Read more about type 1 diabetes. Another type of diabetes, known as gestational diabetes, occurs in some pregnant women and tends to disappear after birth. Symptoms of diabetes The symptoms of diabetes occur because the lack of insulin means glucose stays in the blood and isn't used as fuel for energy. Your body tries to reduce blood glucose levels by getting rid of the excess glucose in your urine. Typical symptoms include: feeling very thirsty passing urine more often than usual, particularly at night feeling very tired weight loss and loss of muscle bulk Read more about the symptoms of type 2 diabetes. It's very important for diabetes to be diagnosed as soon as possible as it will get progressively worse if left untreated. Read about how type 2 diabetes is diagnosed. See your GP if you think you may have diabetes Results for Edit Find your GP\u2019s contact details Your location could not be found. Please try again or enter an alternative location. Please enter a location. Enter a postcode or town Use my current location MainGP is set as your GP Delete MainGP will no longer be used as your main GP Confirm Cancel Please select your GP: Sorry, there has been a problem retrieving your results. Please try again later. No GPs were found for your location Sorry, there has been a problem retrieving details of your GP. Please try again later. Causes of type 2 diabetes Type 2 diabetes occurs when the body doesn't produce enough insulin to function properly, or the body's cells don't react to insulin. This means glucose stays in the blood and isn't used as fuel for energy. Type 2 diabetes is often associated with obesity and tends to be diagnosed in older people. It's far more common than type 1 diabetes. Read about the causes and risk factors for type 2 diabetes. Treating type 2 diabetes As type 2 diabetes usually gets worse, you may eventually need medication \u2013 usually tablets \u2013 to keep your blood glucose at normal levels. Read more about the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Complications of type 2 diabetes Diabetes can cause serious long-term health problems. It's the most common cause of vision loss and blindness in people of working age. Everyone with diabetes aged 12 or over should be invited to have their eyes screened once a year for diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes is also responsible for most cases of kidney failure and lower limb amputation, other than accidents. People with diabetes are up to five times more likely to have cardiovascular disease, such as a stroke, than those without diabetes. Read more about the complications of type 2 diabetes. Preventing type 2 diabetes If you're at risk of type 2 diabetes, you may be able to prevent it developing by making lifestyle changes. These include: eating a healthy, balanced diet losing weight if you're overweight, and maintaining a healthy weight stopping smoking if you smoke drinking alcohol in moderation taking plenty of regular exercise Living with type 2 diabetes If you already have type 2 diabetes, it may be possible to control your symptoms by making the above changes. This also minimises your risk of developing complications. Read more about living with type 2 diabetes. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_67\/accessible.html Page last reviewed: 27\/06\/2016 Next review due: 27\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1709 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 793  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 434  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 286  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Diabetic retinopathy Gestational diabetes Living with diabetes NHS Health Check Type 1 diabetes Video: eat well on a south Asian diet Find diabetes support services Diabetic eye screening External links Diabetes Research and Wellness Foundation Diabetes UK Diabetes UK: type 2 diabetes easy read guide (PDF, 8.51Mb) healthtalk.org: type 2 diabetes HealthUnlocked: healthy eating Lab Tests Online UK: HbA1c test National Obesity Forum Diabetes UK: diabetes education courses Reduce diabetes risk You can lower your risk of type 2 diabetes by maintaining a healthy weight Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-specific urethritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/non_specific_urethritis","content":"Non-gonococcal urethritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Non-gonococcal urethritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Non_specific_urethritis Clinical trials Non-gonococcal urethritis Non_specific_urethritis Symptoms Non_specific_urethritis Causes Non_specific_urethritis Diagnosis Non_specific_urethritis Treatment Non_specific_urethritis Complications Non-gonococcal urethritis  Urethritis is inflammation of the urethra \u2013 the tube that carries urine from the bladder out of the body. It is usually caused by an infection. The term non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU) is used when the condition is not caused by gonorrhoea \u2013 a sexually transmitted infection (STI). NGU is sometimes referred to as non-specific urethritis (NSU) when no cause can be found. In women, NGU rarely has any symptoms. Symptoms in men include: a painful or burning sensation when urinating the tip of the penis feeling irritated and sore a white or cloudy discharge from the tip of the penis Read more about the symptoms of NGU. If you think you have NGU, you should visit your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic or sexual health clinic. These clinics have access to specialist diagnostic equipment that your GP may not have. It is easy to find sexual health services in your area. Sexual health services are free and available to everyone, regardless of age, sex, ethnic origin and sexual orientation. Why does NGU happen? NGU can have a number of possible causes, including irritation to the urethra and STIs. Chlamydia causes up to 43 out of 100 cases of NGU. There are many cases of NGU where no infection is found. If no cause is found, you will still be offered treatment for possible infection. This is also the case if inflammation is caused by an object such as a catheter in the urethra, or by using creams and soaps around the genitals. Read more about the causes of NGU. Who is affected? Urethritis is the most common condition diagnosed and treated among men in GUM clinics or sexual health clinics in the UK. There are around 80,000 men diagnosed with urethritis every year. It is more difficult to diagnose urethritis in women because it may not cause as many symptoms. NGU is usually diagnosed after urine and swab tests. Read more about diagnosing NGU. Treating NGU Antibiotics are usually prescribed to treat NGU. You may be given them before you get your test results. Antibiotics are also used in cases where NGU is thought to have been caused by an object, cream or soap. In most cases, only a short course of treatment is needed and symptoms clear up after about two weeks. The most common antibiotics used are azithromycin and doxycycline (Vibramycin-D). It is important that past and current sexual partners are also treated, to prevent any infection spreading to others. After treatment has been completed, and symptoms have disappeared, it should be safe to start having sex again. Read more about treating NGU. Preventing NGU As NGU is usually caused by an STI, practising safer sex is the best way to reduce the chances of it developing. Safer sex involves using barrier contraception, such as condoms, and having regular checks at sexual health clinics or GUMs. Read more about preventing NGU. Complications NGU can have some complications \u2013 for example, the condition can keep coming back. Other complications include: reactive arthritis \u2013 when the immune system starts attacking healthy tissue, which can lead to joint pain and conjunctivitis epididymo-orchitis \u2013 inflammation of the testicles Women often have no symptoms of NGU. However, if it's caused by chlamydia and left untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Repeated episodes of PID are associated with an increased risk of infertility. Read more about the complications of NGU.  Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_50\/accessible.html Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/09\/2014 Next review due: 02\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 77 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Sexual health Chlamydia Gonorrhoea Sexually transmitted infections Why is my penis smelly and sore? Find sexual health services External links Avert: information about sex Brook: find a service FPA: non-specific urethritis Lab Tests Online UK: testing for a bacterial infection British Association for Sexual Health and HIV: guidelines Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/anti-inflammatories-non-steroidal","content":"NSAIDs - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories NSAIDs  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anti-inflammatories-non-steroidal Clinical trials NSAIDs   Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are medications widely used to relieve pain, reduce inflammation, and bring down a high temperature (fever). They're often used to relieve symptoms of headaches, painful periods, sprains and strains, colds and flu, arthritis, and other causes of long-term pain. Although NSAIDs are commonly used, they're not suitable for everyone and can sometimes cause troublesome side effects. This information is a general overview of NSAIDs. For information about a specific medicine, you can look up your medication on the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) website. This page covers: Types of NSAIDs Who can take NSAIDs Side effects of NSAIDs Interactions with other medicines Food and alcohol Overdoses of NSAIDs Alternatives to NSAIDs Types of NSAIDs NSAIDs are available as tablets, capsules, suppositories (capsules inserted into the bottom), creams, gels and injections. Some can be bought over the counter from pharmacies, while others need a prescription. The main types of NSAIDs include: ibuprofen naproxen diclofenac celecoxib mefenamic acid etoricoxib indometacin high-dose aspirin \u2013 low-dose aspirin isn't normally considered an NSAID NSAIDs may be sold under these names or a brand name. They're all similarly effective, although you may find a particular one works best for you. Who can take NSAIDs? Most people can take NSAIDs, but some people need to be careful about taking them. It's a good idea to ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice before taking an NSAID if you: are over 65 years of age are pregnant or trying for a baby are breastfeeding have asthma have had an allergic reaction to NSAIDs in the past have had stomach ulcers in the past have any problems with your heart, liver, kidneys, blood pressure, circulation, or bowels are taking other medications \u2013 see interactions with other medicines are looking for medication for a child under 16 \u2013 any medication that contains aspirin should not be given to children under 16 NSAIDs might not necessarily need to be avoided in these cases, but they should only be used on the advice of a healthcare professional as there may be a higher risk of side effects. If NSAIDs aren't suitable, your pharmacist or doctor may suggest alternatives to NSAIDs, such as paracetamol. Side effects of NSAIDs Like all medications, there's a risk of side effects from NSAIDs. These tend to be more common if you're taking high doses for a long time, or you're elderly or in poor general health. Over-the-counter NSAIDs generally have fewer side effects than stronger prescription medicines. Possible side effects of NSAIDs include: indigestion \u2013 including stomach aches, feeling sick and diarrhoea stomach ulcers \u2013 these can cause internal bleeding and anaemia; extra medication, such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), may be prescribed to help reduce this risk a hole forming in the wall of your stomach or bowel headaches drowsiness dizziness allergic reactions in rare cases, problems with your liver, kidneys, or heart and circulation, such as heart failure, heart attacks and strokes If you experience any troublesome side effects, stop taking your medicine and tell your doctor. Interactions with other medicines Some NSAIDs can react unpredictably with other medications. This can affect how well either medicine works and increase the risk of side effects. It's particularly important to get medical advice before taking an NSAID if you're already taking: another NSAID low-dose aspirin or warfarin \u2013 medicines used to prevent blood clots ciclosporin \u2013 a medicine used to treat autoimmune conditions such as arthritis or ulcerative colitis diuretics \u2013 medicines sometimes used to treat high blood pressure lithium \u2013 a medicine used to treat bipolar disorder and severe depression methotrexate \u2013 a medicine used to treat rheumatoid arthritis a type of antidepressant medicine called a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) If you're not sure whether a medication you're taking can be taken at the same time as an NSAID, check the leaflet that comes with it, or ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice. Food and alcohol The leaflet that comes with your medicine should say whether you need to avoid any particular foods or drinks. Ask your pharmacist or doctor if you're not sure. For information about a specific medicine, check the A-Z of medicine leaflets on the MHRA website. Generally, you don't need to avoid any specific foods while taking NSAIDs. Tablets or capsules should normally be swallowed with water or food to stop them upsetting your stomach. It's usually safe to drink alcohol while taking NSAIDs, but drinking alcohol excessively during treatment may irritate your stomach. Overdoses of NSAIDs Taking too much of an NSAID can be dangerous. This is known as taking an overdose. Contact your GP or NHS 111 for advice immediately if you take too much of your medicine and you experience problems such as feeling or being sick, an upset stomach, or drowsiness. Call 999 for an ambulance immediately if you or someone else experiences serious effects of an overdose, such as fits (seizures), breathing difficulties, or loss of consciousness. Alternatives to NSAIDs As NSAIDs can cause troublesome side effects, alternatives are often recommended first. The main alternative for pain relief is paracetamol, which is available over the counter and is safe for most people to take. NSAID creams and gels that you rub into your skin may be worth trying first if you have muscle or joint pain in a particular part of your body, as they tend to have fewer side effects than tablets or capsules. Your doctor may also be able to recommend different medicines and therapies depending on the condition you have. For example, physiotherapy may help some people with muscle or joint pain. Page last reviewed: 22\/03\/2016 Next review due: 22\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 395 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 138  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with pain Paracetamol Stomach ulcers Which painkiller? External links Arthritis Research UK: NSAIDs Pain Concern Yellow Card Scheme Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Noonan syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Noonan-syndrome","content":"Noonan syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Noonan syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Noonan-syndrome Clinical trials Noonan syndrome Noonan-syndrome Characteristics Noonan-syndrome Causes Noonan-syndrome Diagnosis Noonan-syndrome Treatment Introduction  Noonan syndrome is a genetic disorder that can cause a wide range of distinctive features and health problems. The condition is present from before birth, although milder cases may not be diagnosed until a child gets older. The most common features of Noonan syndrome are: unusual facial features, such as a broad forehead, drooping eyelids and a wider-than-usual distance between the eyes short stature (restricted growth) heart defects (congenital heart disease) It's estimated that between 1 in 1,000 and 1 in 2,500 children are born with Noonan syndrome. It affects both sexes and all ethnic groups equally. Read more about the characteristics of Noonan syndrome and diagnosing Noonan syndrome. What causes Noonan syndrome? Noonan syndrome is caused by a fault in one of several genes. At least eight different faulty genes have been linked to the condition so far. In some cases, the faulty gene associated with Noonan syndrome is inherited from one of the child's parents. The parent with the faulty gene may or may not have obvious features of the condition themselves. Only one parent needs to carry the fault to pass it on and each child they have has a 50% chance of being born with the condition. In other cases, the disorder is caused by a new genetic fault that isn't inherited from either parent. In these cases, the chance of the parents having another child with Noonan syndrome is very small.  Read more about the causes of Noonan syndrome. Treatments for Noonan syndrome There is currently no single treatment for Noonan syndrome, but it's often possible to successfully manage many aspects of the disorder. For example, severe heart defects may need to be repaired with surgery, and growth hormone medication may be used to help prevent restricted growth. Your child may initially need quite a lot of treatment and support to help manage the various problems they have. However, they'll usually need much less care as they get older, because the disorder tends to cause fewer problems in adulthood. Read more about treating Noonan syndrome. Outlook Noonan syndrome can range from being very mild to severe and life-threatening. In many cases, the problems associated with the condition can be treated successfully at a young age or become less prominent over time. Almost all children with Noonan syndrome reach adulthood and most are able to lead normal, independent lives. However, problems such as heart defects can occasionally be severe and life-threatening. Some children may need emergency surgery to correct the problem as soon as possible, and most people with Noonan syndrome will need to have their heart monitored regularly throughout their life. Information about your child If your child has Noonan syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Noonan Syndrome Association If you or your child has been diagnosed with Noonan syndrome, you may find the Noonan Syndrome Association a useful source of support and advice. You can visit the Noonan Syndrome Association website or call their free nurse helpline on 0800 902 0095 for more information. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 62 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Congenital heart disease Restricted growth Screening tests in pregnancy External links Contact a Family: Noonan syndrome Noonan Syndrome Association Special needs in children If your child has a health condition or disability, they may need specialised healthcare and help at school Screening in pregnancy Screening for abnormalities in pregnancy, including inherited disorders such as sickle cell NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Norovirus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Norovirus","content":"Norovirus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Norovirus   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Norovirus Clinical trials Norovirus   Norovirus, which causes diarrhoea and vomiting, is one of the most common stomach bugs in the UK. It's also called the \"winter vomiting bug\" because it's more common in winter, although you can catch it at any time of the year. Norovirus can be very unpleasant but it usually clears up by itself in a few days. You can normally look after yourself or your child at home. Try to avoid going to your GP, as norovirus can spread to others very easily. Call your GP or NHS 111 if you're concerned or need any advice. This page covers: Symptoms of norovirus What to do if you have norovirus When to get medical advice How is norovirus spread? Preventing norovirus Symptoms of norovirus The symptoms of norovirus are very distinctive. You're likely to have norovirus if you experience: suddenly feeling sick projectile vomiting watery diarrhoea Some people also have a slight fever, headaches, painful stomach cramps and aching limbs. The symptoms appear one to two days after you become infected and typically last for up to two or three days. What to do if you have norovirus If you experience sudden diarrhoea and vomiting, the best thing to do is to stay at home until you're feeling better. There's no cure for norovirus, so you have to let it run its course. You don't usually need to get medical advice unless there's a risk of a more serious problem (see When to get medical advice). To help ease your own or your child\u2019s symptoms: Drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration. You need to drink more than usual to replace the fluids lost from vomiting and diarrhoea \u2013 as well as water, adults could also try fruit juice and soup. Avoid giving fizzy drinks or fruit juice to children as it can make their diarrhoea worse. Babies should continue to feed as usual, either with breast milk or other milk feeds. Take paracetamol for any fever or aches and pains. Get plenty of rest. If you feel like eating, eat plain foods, such as soup, rice, pasta and bread. Use special rehydration drinks made from sachets bought from pharmacies if you have signs of dehydration, such as a dry mouth or dark urine \u2013 read more about treating dehydration. Adults can take antidiarrhoeal and\/or anti-emetic (anti-vomiting) medication \u2013 these are not suitable for everyone though, so you should check the medicine leaflet or ask or your pharmacist or GP for advice before trying them. Babies and young children, especially if they're less than a year old, have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated. Read advice about looking after babies and children under five who have diarrhoea and vomiting. Norovirus can spread very easily, so you should wash your hands regularly while you're ill and stay off work or school until at least 48 hours after the symptoms have cleared, to reduce the risk of passing it on (see Preventing norovirus below). When to get medical advice You don't normally need to see your GP if you think you or your child has norovirus, as there's no specific treatment for it.  Antibiotics won't help because it's caused by a virus. Visiting your GP surgery with norovirus can put others at risk, so it's best to call your GP or NHS 111 if you're concerned or feel you need advice. Get medical advice if: your baby or child has passed six or more watery stools in the past 24 hours, or has vomited three times or more in the past 24 hours your baby or child is less responsive, feverish, or has pale or mottled skin you or your child has symptoms of severe dehydration, such as persistent dizziness, only passing small amounts of urine or no urine at all, or reduced consciousness \u2013 babies and elderly people have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated you have bloody diarrhoea your symptoms haven't started to improve after a few days you or your child have a serious underlying condition, such as kidney disease, and have diarrhoea and vomiting Your GP may suggest sending off a sample of your stool to a laboratory to confirm whether you have norovirus or another infection. How is norovirus spread? Norovirus spreads very easily in public places such as hospitals, nursing homes and schools. You can catch it if small particles of vomit or poo from an infected person get into your mouth, such as through: close contact with someone with norovirus \u2013 they may breathe out small particles containing the virus that you could inhale touching contaminated surfaces or objects \u2013 the virus can survive outside the body for several days eating contaminated food \u2013 this can happen if an infected person doesn't wash their hands before handling food A person with norovirus is most infectious from when their symptoms start until 48 hours after all their symptoms have passed, although they may also be infectious for a short time before and after this. You can get norovirus more than once because the virus is always changing, so your body is unable to build up long-term resistance to it. Preventing norovirus It's not always possible to avoid getting norovirus, but following the advice below can help stop the virus spreading. Stay off work or school until at least 48 hours after the symptoms have passed. You should also avoid visiting anyone in hospital during this time. Wash your hands frequently and thoroughly with soap and water, particularly after using the toilet and before preparing food. Don't rely on alcohol hand gels, as they do not kill the virus. Disinfect any surfaces or objects that could be contaminated. It's best to use a bleach-based household cleaner. Wash any items of clothing or bedding that could have become contaminated separately on a hot wash to ensure the virus is killed. Don't share towels and flannels. Flush away any infected poo or vomit in the toilet and clean the surrounding area. Avoid eating raw, unwashed produce and only eat oysters from a reliable source, as oysters can carry norovirus. Read more about preventing germs from spreading. Page last reviewed: 05\/10\/2015 Next review due: 05\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2750 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1695  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 553  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 284  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dehydration Diarrhoea Food safety Gastroenteritis News: norovirus outbreak External links Fit for Travel: norovirus Public Health England: norovirus leaflet (PDF, 270kb) Norovirus: schools guide (PDF, 1.7Mb) Looking after a sick child How to look after a sick child, including dealing with minor accidents and getting help How to prevent germs from spreading Cleaning and good hygiene tips to help reduce the number of germs in your home Food safety How to prevent food poisoning at home, including E. coli, with advice on food safety and keeping germs in check NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nose and sinus cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cancer-of-the-nose-and-sinus","content":"Nasal and sinus cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nasal and sinus cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview cancer-of-the-nose-and-sinus Clinical trials Nasal and sinus cancer   Nasal and sinus cancer affects the nasal cavity (the space behind your nose) and the sinuses (small, air-filled cavities inside your nose, cheekbones and forehead). It's a rare type of cancer that most often affects men aged 50-60. Nasal and sinus cancer is different to cancer in the area where the nose and throat connect. This is called nasopharyngeal cancer. This page covers: Symptoms When to see your GP Who's at risk Treatments Outlook Symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer The most common symptoms of nasal and sinus cancer are: a persistent blocked nose, which usually only affects one side nosebleeds mucus draining from the nose, which may be blood-stained a decreased sense of smell These symptoms can be similar to more common and less serious conditions, such as a cold or sinusitis. At a later stage, symptoms can include: pain or numbness in the face swollen glands in the neck partial loss of vision or double vision a bulging or persistently watering eye a lump or growth on your face, nose or roof of your mouth When to see your GP See your GP if you notice any unusual or persistent symptoms. They're very unlikely to be caused by nasal or sinus cancer, but are worth getting checked out. If your GP thinks you might need some tests to determine what's causing your symptoms, you'll usually be referred to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) consultant in hospital. Tests you may have include: a nasal endoscopy \u2013 where a long, thin, flexible tube attached to a light source is inserted into your nose to examine the area a computerised tomography (CT) scan and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan a biopsy (where a small sample of tissue is removed and examined) \u2013 this may be done during an endoscopy or using a needle Who's at risk of nasal and sinus cancer Several factors are known to increase the risk of developing nasal and sinus cancer, including: your gender \u2013 men are more likely to develop nasal and sinus cancer than women prolonged exposure to certain substances through your work, including wood dust, leather dust, nickel, chromium and formaldehyde smoking \u2013 the more you smoke, the higher your risk of developing several types of cancer, including nasal and sinus cancer human papilloma virus (HPV) \u2013 a group of viruses that affect the skin and moist membranes, such as the mouth and throat The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) has produced a report on the risk of occupational nasal and sinus cancer in Great Britain (PDF, 2Mb). Treatments for nasal and sinus cancer The best treatment depends on several factors, including how far the cancer has spread and your general health. Treatment may include: surgery to remove a tumour \u2013 which can be performed using surgical incisions (open surgery) or as keyhole surgery through the nose (endoscopic microsurgery) radiotherapy \u2013 where high-energy radiation is used to kill the cancerous cells, shrink a tumour before surgery, or destroy small amounts of a tumour that may be left after surgery chemotherapy \u2013 where medicine is used to help shrink or slow down the growth of a tumour, or to reduce the risk of the cancer returning after surgery Your treatment will be organised by a head and neck cancer multidisciplinary team (MDT), who will discuss the treatment options with you. A combination of treatments will often be recommended. Outlook for nasal and sinus cancer There are many different types of cancer that can affect the nasal cavity and sinuses. The outlook varies, depending on the specific type you have. Overall, around one in every two or three people with nasal and sinus cancer will live for at least five years after diagnosis. However, this can vary, depending on things such as exactly where the cancer is located and how far it has spread before it's diagnosed and treated. Nearly everyone diagnosed at an early stage will live for at least five years. However, if it's not diagnosed until an advanced stage, only around one in every three to five people will live at least five years. Cancer of the nasal cavity generally has a better outlook than cancer of the sinuses. Want to know more? Living with cancer Macmillan: nasal and sinus cancers Cancer Research UK: nasal and paranasal sinus cancer  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 25\/05\/2016 Next review due: 25\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 59 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Nasopharyngeal cancer Head and neck cancer Living with cancer Find cancer support services External links Macmillan: paranasal sinus cancer Cancer Research UK: nasal and paranasal sinus cancer My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services Cancer: your test results If you're waiting for your test results, find out how you can prepare for your consultation Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nose job","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/nose-job.aspx","content":"Nose job Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Nose reshaping (rhinoplasty) Nose reshaping (rhinoplasty, or a 'nose job') is an operation to change the shape or size of the nose. It's not usually available on the NHS if done for cosmetic reasons, but may be provided on the NHS if it's needed to help you breathe. Nose reshaping surgery is a delicate, complex operation. The results can\u2019t be guaranteed, there are risks to consider, and it can be expensive. Be sure about your reasons for having it before you go ahead. It's a good idea to discuss your plans with your GP first. You can also read \"Is cosmetic surgery right for me?\" Read on to find out: How much does it cost?  Where do I go?  What does it involve?  Recovery  Side effects to expect  What could go wrong  What to do if you have problems  More information  How much does it cost? The cost of nose reshaping in the UK ranges from £4,500 to £7,000. You should also factor in the cost of any consultations, further surgery or follow-up care that may be needed. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform a rhinoplasty. All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC, which publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. You should also research the surgeon who is going to carry out the rhinoplasty. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor\u2019s fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? Nose reshaping is usually carried out under general anaesthetic. The surgeon may do any of the following: make the nose smaller (nose reduction), by removing some of the cartilage and bone make the nose larger (nose augmentation), by taking cartilage from the ears and bone from the hips, elbow or skull, and using this to build up the nose (known as a \"graft\") change the nose's shape (including the nostrils), by breaking the nose bone and rearranging the cartilage change the angle between the nose and top lip The skin over the nose should just shrink or expand to its new shape. The operation involves either making one cut across the skin between the nostrils (\"open rhinoplasty\"), or tiny cuts inside the nostrils (\"closed rhinoplasty\").  A closed rhinoplasty leaves no visible scars and causes less swelling, but isn\u2019t always possible or available. Either way, the procedure can take from an hour and a half to three hours. Most people would need to stay in hospital for one or two nights. You\u2019d probably leave hospital with dressings (\"packs\") in each nostril, and a splint held over your nose with tape. You wouldn't be able to breathe through your nose. Painkillers would be given to control any mild pain. Recovery You may need to take up to two weeks off work to recover. It might be several months before you see the full effect of the nose operation, and up to six months for all of the swelling to completely go. You wouldn't be able to drive for a few days after the operation \u2013 your surgeon would advise about this. After about a week: Stitches would be removed (unless you had dissolvable stitches). The splint may be able to come off. At three weeks: Bruises, swelling and redness may have faded. You may be able to swim. At four to six weeks: You may be able to resume contact sports. You\u2019d probably be advised to: prop your head up with pillows for a couple of days when resting, to reduce the swelling avoid hot baths and getting the splint wet avoid blowing your nose or removing any crusts until your appointment to have the splint removed  sneeze through your mouth, to avoid pressure on your nose avoid dusty or smoky places avoid strenuous exercise or contact sports for four to six weeks take paracetamol or another prescribed painkiller to relieve any mild pain Side effects to expect It\u2019s common after nose reshaping to have: a blocked nose \u2013 you\u2019d need to breathe through your mouth for a week or so stiffness and numbness of the nose soreness, swelling and bruising around the eyes, which can last three weeks light nosebleeds for the first few days What could go wrong Nose reshaping surgery can occasionally result in: permanent breathing difficulty damage to the cartilage wall between your nostrils an altered sense of smell heavy nosebleeds Any type of operation also carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding developing a blood clot in a vein infection an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic The surgeon should explain how likely these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, patients find the desired effect wasn\u2019t achieved and feel they need another operation. What to do if you have problems  Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms. If you have a rhinoplasty and are not happy with the results, or you think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). More information BAAPS: nose reduction and nose augmentation BAPRAS: rhinoplasty  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: How do I choose a surgeon?  BAAPS: nose reduction and nose augmentation BAPRAS: rhinoplasty   Cosmetic surgery abroad Considering going overseas for your op? Make sure you weigh up any potential savings against the potential risks NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nosebleed","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Nosebleed","content":"Nosebleed - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nosebleed  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Nosebleed Clinical trials Nosebleed Nosebleed Causes Nosebleed Treatment Introduction  Nosebleeds can be frightening, but they aren't usually a sign of anything serious and can often be treated at home. The medical name for a nosebleed is epistaxis. During a nosebleed, blood flows from one or both nostrils. It can be heavy or light and last from a few seconds to 10 minutes or more. What to do To stop a nosebleed: sit down and firmly pinch the soft part of your nose, just above your nostrils, for at least 10-15 minutes lean forward and breathe through your mouth \u2013 this will drain blood down your nose instead of down the back of your throat place an ice pack or bag of frozen vegetables covered by a towel on the bridge of your nose  stay upright, rather than lying down, as this reduces the blood pressure in the blood vessels of your nose and will discourage further bleeding If the bleeding eventually stops, you won't usually need to seek medical advice. However, in some cases you may need further treatment from your GP or in hospital (see below). Read more about treating nosebleeds. When to seek medical advice Contact your GP or call NHS 111 if: you're taking a blood-thinning medicine (anticoagulant) such as warfarin or have a clotting disorder such as haemophilia and the bleeding doesn't stop you have symptoms of anaemia such as heart palpitations, shortness of breath and a pale complexion a child under two years of age has a nosebleed you have nosebleeds that come and go regularly Ask someone to drive you to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999 for an ambulance if: the bleeding continues for longer than 20 minutes the bleeding is heavy and you've lost a lot of blood you're having difficulty breathing you swallow a large amount of blood that makes you vomit the nosebleed developed after a serious injury, such as a car crash Find your nearest A&E department. What causes nosebleeds? The inside of your nose is full of tiny, delicate blood vessels that can become damaged and bleed relatively easily. Common causes of nosebleeds include: picking your nose blowing your nose very hard a minor injury to your nose changes in humidity or temperature causing the inside of the nose to become dry and cracked Occasionally, bleeding can come from the blood vessels deeper within the nose. This can be caused by a blow to the head, recent nasal surgery and hardened arteries (atherosclerosis). Read more about the causes of nosebleeds. Who gets nosebleeds? Nosebleeds are fairly common and most people will experience them every now and again. Anyone can get a nosebleed, but they most often affect: children between two and 10 years of age elderly people pregnant women people who regularly take aspirin or anticoagulants, such as warfarin people with blood clotting disorders, such as haemophilia Bleeding may also be heavier or last longer if you take anticoagulants, have a blood clotting disorder, or have high blood pressure (hypertension). Are nosebleeds serious? Nosebleeds aren't usually serious. However, frequent or heavy nosebleeds may indicate more serious health problems, such as high blood pressure or a blood clotting disorder, and should be checked. Excessive bleeding over a prolonged period of time can also lead to further problems such as anaemia. If your GP suspects a more serious problem is causing your nosebleeds, they may refer you to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist for further tests. Preventing nosebleeds Things you can do to prevent nosebleeds include: avoid picking your nose and keep your fingernails short blow your nose as little as possible and only very gently keep your home humidified regularly apply petroleum jelly (such as Vaseline) to the inside of your nostrils to keep the inside of your nose moist wear a head guard during activities in which your nose or head could get injured always follow the instructions that come with nasal decongestants \u2013 overusing these can cause nosebleeds Talk to your GP if you experience nosebleeds frequently and aren't able to prevent them. They may refer you to an ENT specialist for an assessment. Page last reviewed: 21\/04\/2015 Next review due: 21\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1637 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 887  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 413  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 107  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 73  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 157  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaemia Anticoagulants First aid High blood pressure External links St John Ambulance: nosebleeds First aid What to do if someone is injured in an accident About A&E departments Find out when it is appropriate to go to A&E and what other services offer urgent care NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"NSAIDs","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/anti-inflammatories-non-steroidal","content":"NSAIDs - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories NSAIDs  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anti-inflammatories-non-steroidal Clinical trials NSAIDs   Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are medications widely used to relieve pain, reduce inflammation, and bring down a high temperature (fever). They're often used to relieve symptoms of headaches, painful periods, sprains and strains, colds and flu, arthritis, and other causes of long-term pain. Although NSAIDs are commonly used, they're not suitable for everyone and can sometimes cause troublesome side effects. This information is a general overview of NSAIDs. For information about a specific medicine, you can look up your medication on the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) website. This page covers: Types of NSAIDs Who can take NSAIDs Side effects of NSAIDs Interactions with other medicines Food and alcohol Overdoses of NSAIDs Alternatives to NSAIDs Types of NSAIDs NSAIDs are available as tablets, capsules, suppositories (capsules inserted into the bottom), creams, gels and injections. Some can be bought over the counter from pharmacies, while others need a prescription. The main types of NSAIDs include: ibuprofen naproxen diclofenac celecoxib mefenamic acid etoricoxib indometacin high-dose aspirin \u2013 low-dose aspirin isn't normally considered an NSAID NSAIDs may be sold under these names or a brand name. They're all similarly effective, although you may find a particular one works best for you. Who can take NSAIDs? Most people can take NSAIDs, but some people need to be careful about taking them. It's a good idea to ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice before taking an NSAID if you: are over 65 years of age are pregnant or trying for a baby are breastfeeding have asthma have had an allergic reaction to NSAIDs in the past have had stomach ulcers in the past have any problems with your heart, liver, kidneys, blood pressure, circulation, or bowels are taking other medications \u2013 see interactions with other medicines are looking for medication for a child under 16 \u2013 any medication that contains aspirin should not be given to children under 16 NSAIDs might not necessarily need to be avoided in these cases, but they should only be used on the advice of a healthcare professional as there may be a higher risk of side effects. If NSAIDs aren't suitable, your pharmacist or doctor may suggest alternatives to NSAIDs, such as paracetamol. Side effects of NSAIDs Like all medications, there's a risk of side effects from NSAIDs. These tend to be more common if you're taking high doses for a long time, or you're elderly or in poor general health. Over-the-counter NSAIDs generally have fewer side effects than stronger prescription medicines. Possible side effects of NSAIDs include: indigestion \u2013 including stomach aches, feeling sick and diarrhoea stomach ulcers \u2013 these can cause internal bleeding and anaemia; extra medication, such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), may be prescribed to help reduce this risk a hole forming in the wall of your stomach or bowel headaches drowsiness dizziness allergic reactions in rare cases, problems with your liver, kidneys, or heart and circulation, such as heart failure, heart attacks and strokes If you experience any troublesome side effects, stop taking your medicine and tell your doctor. Interactions with other medicines Some NSAIDs can react unpredictably with other medications. This can affect how well either medicine works and increase the risk of side effects. It's particularly important to get medical advice before taking an NSAID if you're already taking: another NSAID low-dose aspirin or warfarin \u2013 medicines used to prevent blood clots ciclosporin \u2013 a medicine used to treat autoimmune conditions such as arthritis or ulcerative colitis diuretics \u2013 medicines sometimes used to treat high blood pressure lithium \u2013 a medicine used to treat bipolar disorder and severe depression methotrexate \u2013 a medicine used to treat rheumatoid arthritis a type of antidepressant medicine called a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) If you're not sure whether a medication you're taking can be taken at the same time as an NSAID, check the leaflet that comes with it, or ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice. Food and alcohol The leaflet that comes with your medicine should say whether you need to avoid any particular foods or drinks. Ask your pharmacist or doctor if you're not sure. For information about a specific medicine, check the A-Z of medicine leaflets on the MHRA website. Generally, you don't need to avoid any specific foods while taking NSAIDs. Tablets or capsules should normally be swallowed with water or food to stop them upsetting your stomach. It's usually safe to drink alcohol while taking NSAIDs, but drinking alcohol excessively during treatment may irritate your stomach. Overdoses of NSAIDs Taking too much of an NSAID can be dangerous. This is known as taking an overdose. Contact your GP or NHS 111 for advice immediately if you take too much of your medicine and you experience problems such as feeling or being sick, an upset stomach, or drowsiness. Call 999 for an ambulance immediately if you or someone else experiences serious effects of an overdose, such as fits (seizures), breathing difficulties, or loss of consciousness. Alternatives to NSAIDs As NSAIDs can cause troublesome side effects, alternatives are often recommended first. The main alternative for pain relief is paracetamol, which is available over the counter and is safe for most people to take. NSAID creams and gels that you rub into your skin may be worth trying first if you have muscle or joint pain in a particular part of your body, as they tend to have fewer side effects than tablets or capsules. Your doctor may also be able to recommend different medicines and therapies depending on the condition you have. For example, physiotherapy may help some people with muscle or joint pain. Page last reviewed: 22\/03\/2016 Next review due: 22\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 395 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 138  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with pain Paracetamol Stomach ulcers Which painkiller? External links Arthritis Research UK: NSAIDs Pain Concern Yellow Card Scheme Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nummular eczema","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Eczema-(discoid)","content":"Discoid eczema - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Discoid eczema  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Eczema-(discoid) Clinical trials Eczema-(discoid) Community Eczema-(discoid) Discoid eczema Eczema-(discoid) Symptoms Eczema-(discoid) Causes Eczema-(discoid) Treatment Introduction  Discoid eczema is a long-term skin condition that causes skin to become itchy, reddened, swollen and cracked in circular or oval patches. It's also known as discoid dermatitis. The patches can be a few millimetres to a few centimetres in size and can affect any part of the body, although they don't usually affect the face or scalp. The patches are often swollen, blistered (covered with small fluid-filled pockets) and ooze fluid at first, but become dry, crusty, cracked and flaky over time. The patches may clear up on their own eventually, but this can take weeks, months or even years if not treated, and they can recur. Read more about the symptoms of discoid eczema. Seeking medical advice You should see your pharmacist or GP if you think you may have discoid eczema. Your GP should be able to make a diagnosis just by examining the affected areas of skin. In some cases they may also ask questions or arrange some tests to rule out other conditions. Your GP may refer you to a dermatologist (a doctor who specialises in managing skin conditions) if they are unsure of the diagnosis or if you need patch testing. Your GP or specialist can recommend suitable treatments. What causes discoid eczema? The cause of discoid eczema is unknown, although it is often accompanied by dry skin and is thought to be triggered by irritation of the skin. Discoid eczema tends to affect adults and is rare in children. It is more common among men aged from 50 to 70 and women in their teens or twenties. Some people with discoid eczema may also have other types of eczema, such as atopic eczema. Read more about the causes of discoid eczema. How discoid eczema is treated Discoid eczema is usually a long-term problem, but medications are available to help relieve the symptoms and keep the condition under control. Treatments used include: emollients \u2013 moisturisers applied to the skin to stop it becoming dry topical corticosteroids \u2013 ointments and creams applied to the skin that can help relieve severe symptoms antihistamines \u2013 medications that can reduce itching and help you sleep better There are also things you can do yourself to help, such as avoiding all the irritating chemicals in soaps, detergents, bubble baths and shower gels. Additional medication can be prescribed if your eczema is infected or particularly severe. Read more about treating discoid eczema. Other types of eczema Eczema is the name for a group of skin conditions that cause dry, irritated skin. Other types of eczema include: atopic eczema (also called atopic dermatitis) \u2013 the most common type of eczema, it often runs in families and is linked to other conditions such as asthma and hay fever contact dermatitis \u2013 a type of eczema that occurs when the body comes into contact with a particular substance varicose eczema \u2013 a type of eczema that most often affects the lower legs and is caused by problems with the flow of blood through the leg veins Page last reviewed: 22\/10\/2014 Next review due: 22\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 117 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atopic eczema Contact dermatitis Emollients Topical corticosteroids Varicose eczema External links British Association of Dermatologists: discoid eczema National Eczema Society: discoid eczema Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Nutrition","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/goodfood\/Pages\/Goodfoodhome.aspx","content":"Good food and healthy diet - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Food and diet Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Food and diet Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Sugar and our health From the age of 11 we should have no more than 30g of added sugars (about 7 sugar cubes) in our diet every day. Find out why. How to cut down on sugar in your diet Practical tips to help you reduce the amount of sugar you eat throughout the day. The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group. Eating a balanced diet A healthy diet contains food from the major food groups to give us the energy and nutrients we need. Eight tips for healthy eating Start eating well with these eight tips for a healthy diet. Cut down on your calories Many of us are eating too much and not being active enough. Find out how to cut the calories. Understanding calories Calories mean energy, and the right energy balance is the key to a healthy weight. Water, drinks and your health Find out how much you need to drink and how to choose healthier soft drinks. How to get more fibre into your diet Most people need more fibre in their diet. Find out which foods are high in fibre. What does 100 calories look like? A visual guide to 100-calorie (420 kilojoules) portion sizes compared with everyday household objects. Salt: the facts Most people in the UK eat too much salt. But cutting back is possible, if you know how. Tips for a lower-salt diet Eating too much salt can cause high blood pressure. Follow these practical tips to reduce your salt intake. Fat: the facts Find out about the role fats play in a healthy diet, including saturated fats and unsaturated fats. Eat less saturated fat Too much saturated fat can cause weight gain, and raised cholesterol. Find out how you can cut down. Food labels How to understand food labels and make healthier choices when shopping. Food labelling terms A guide to some of the most common food labelling terms, including use by, best before, low fat and no added sugar. Eating processed foods Information about different kinds of processed foods, and which to eat as part of a healthy balanced diet. What are 'reference intakes' on food labels? Reference intakes have replaced guideline daily amounts (GDA). They can help you check the amount of foods you eat that are high in fat, salt and added sugars. Healthy breakfast cereals We sort the shredded wheat from the chaff to help you choose healthier breakfast cereals. Food and drinks for sport Find out how a healthy diet can support your exercise regime. The truth about sweeteners Find out the evidence on the safety of some of the most common sweeteners available in the UK. Milk and dairy in your diet Milk and dairy foods provide protein and calcium. Make a healthy choice by opting for lower-fat varieties. Fish and shellfish Most of us should eat more fish, especially oily fish. Find out why. The healthy way to eat eggs Eggs are a good source of protein, but it's important to store, handle and prepare them properly. Beans and pulses in your diet Pulses are a great source of protein. Find out how to cook and store them. Meat in your diet Meat is a good source of protein. Find out how to make healthy choices, and how to store, prepare and cook meat. Starchy foods and carbohydrates Starchy foods are our main source of carbohydrate and play an important role in a healthy diet. Vitamins, minerals and supplements How to get all the nutrients you need, and safety advice about supplements Start losing weight Begin your weight loss journey today with these tips on diet and physical activity to get started on losing weight. Healthy food swaps Stop eating high-calorie foods and swap them for a healthy, balanced alternative. Healthy eating out Make healthier choices when you eat out at restaurants and cafes or grab lunch on the go. Healthier takeaways You don't have to give up takeaways completely, as long as you make the right menu choices. What are superfoods? We examine the evidence behind the health claims about 10 popular \"superfoods\". 5 A DAY on a budget A diet full of fruit and vegetables doesn't have to be expensive. Here's how to get your 5 A DAY and save some money. Healthy lunchbox treats Make sure your child's lunchbox provides a healthy nutritionally balanced lunch. Overweight children aged 2-5 Being overweight can affect young children's health, but a balanced diet and some exercise can help them reach a healthy weight. What can I do if my child is overweight? Practical advice for parents of overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and physical activity. What can I do if my child is very overweight? Healthy eating and exercise tips, plus advice on calories, portion control and weight management clubs. Healthy-weight children: advice for parents How to keep children at a healthy weight, including mealtime and physical activity tips, plus advice on sleep, screen-time and family outings. Perfect picnics A picnic is a great opportunity to eat healthily and get active outdoors. Here are some healthy picnic foods and activity ideas. Underweight children aged 2-5 If your child is a two- to five-year-old and is underweight, find out how to help them gain weight healthily. Underweight children aged 6-12 Maintaining a healthy weight is vital for children. If your child is aged 6-12 years old and is underweight, a good diet is key. Underweight teen girls Do you think you might be underweight? Read these tips on gaining weight healthily. Underweight teen boys If you're worried about being underweight, here's how to gain weight safely and healthily. Underweight adults If you're underweight, you could be harming your health. A good diet is the key to healthy weight gain. What is a Mediterranean diet? Find out what foods make up a typical Mediterranean diet and how it can benefit your health. Kids in the kitchen Get your kids used to cooking healthy food by letting them help while keeping in mind safety in the kitchen. Quick nutrition links The Eatwell Guide Fruit and veg Starchy foods Milk and dairy Eggs Fish and shellfish Meat Pulses and beans Fats Sugars Salt Drinks Vitamins and minerals Food labels Let's get Sugar Smart! Get the NEW Sugar Smart app and join Change4Life today for free vouchers, recipes and Sugar Smart ideas for your family. Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Eat4Cheap Tips to help you eat a healthy diet and save money on your weekly food shopping bill Vitamins, minerals and supplements How to get all the nutrients you need, and safety advice about supplements Vegetarians and vegans Advice on healthy and balanced vegetarian and vegan diets including essential nutrients How to prepare and cook food safely How to prepare and cook food correctly to reduce the risk of food poisoning, including E. coli Healthy recipes Healthy recipe ideas for meals low in fat, saturated fat, sugar and salt, but high in taste Food allergy Common foods that can cause a reaction, warning signs, and what to do if you're allergic Eat well in pregnancy Find out how to follow a diet that's healthy for you and your baby, and which foods to avoid Your baby's first solid foods How to begin feeding your baby solid foods, including what foods to give them and when to start weaning 10 surprising 100-calorie snacks Keep hunger at bay with these low-calorie twists on some of the nation's favourite snacks Bodybuilding and sports supplements Supplements are popular for people wanting to lose weight and build muscle, but some are illegal and dangerous 5 A DAY Whether you're cooking for a family or eating on the run, our tips and recipes can help you get your 5 A DAY Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the BMI Healthy weight calculator information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/healthy_weight_v3\/accessible.html Get healthy as a family 10 ways to involve the whole family in keeping children in trim, including activity holidays and eating together Lose weight Weight loss resources to help you lose weight healthily, including the NHS 12-week diet and exercise plan Healthy eating for teens A healthy diet can help you look and feel your best. Don't follow the latest food fad: find out the truth about healthy eating Five healthy breakfasts Get into the habit of eating breakfast with these delicious calorie-counted breakfasts NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Malnutrition","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Malnutrition","content":"Malnutrition - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Malnutrition  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Malnutrition Clinical trials Malnutrition Malnutrition Symptoms Malnutrition Causes Malnutrition Diagnosis Malnutrition Treatment Malnutrition Prevention Introduction  Malnutrition is a serious condition that occurs when a person\u2019s diet doesn't contain the right amount of nutrients. Malnutrition means \"poor nutrition\" and can refer to: undernutrition \u2013 when you don't get enough nutrients overnutrition \u2013 when you get more nutrients than you need This topic focuses on undernutrition. See obesity for more information about the main problems associated with overnutrition. Who's affected by malnutrition? Malnutrition is a common health problem. There are an estimated 3 million malnourished people in the UK at any time, with many more at risk of becoming malnourished. Around one in three people admitted to hospital or care homes in the UK are found to be malnourished or at risk of malnourishment. Malnutrition is caused by having an inadequate diet or a problem absorbing nutrients from food. There are many reasons why these might happen, including having reduced mobility, a long-term health condition, or a low income. Read more about the causes of malnutrition. Signs of malnutrition The most common symptom of undernutrition is unintentional weight loss (losing 5-10% or more of your body weight over three to six months). Other signs can include: weak muscles feeling tired all the time low mood an increase in illnesses or infections  The main sign of overnutrition is being overweight or obese. However, people with undernutrition can also be overweight if they eat a diet high in energy (calories), but low in other nutrients. Signs of malnutrition in children can include failure to grow at the expected rate and changes in behaviour, such as appearing unusually irritable, sluggish or anxious. Your child\u2019s weight and physical development should be regularly assessed by your GP when your child is young. Speak to your GP or health visitor if you have any concerns about your child\u2019s health or development. Read more about the symptoms of malnutrition. When to see your GP See your GP if your body mass index (BMI) is lower than 18.5 or you notice the above symptoms.  BMI is a measure of whether you're a healthy weight for your height. You can use the BMI healthy weight calculator to work out your BMI. You should visit your GP if you believe you or someone you care for is at risk of malnutrition. They can check for signs of malnourishment and any conditions that may cause malnutrition. Read more about diagnosing malnutrition. Treating malnutrition Depending on what's caused a person to become malnourished and how severe it is, treatment may be carried out at home or in hospital. Dietary changes are the main treatment for malnutrition. If you're undernourished, you may need to increase the nutritional content of your food, with or without taking nutritional supplements. If you're unable to eat enough to meet your nutritional needs you may need: a feeding tube to provide nutrients directly into your digestive system a drip to provide nutrients and fluids directly into a vein Read more about treating malnutrition. Preventing malnutrition The best way to prevent malnutrition is to eat a healthy, balanced diet. A healthy, balanced diet is vital for maintaining health and fitness. To stay healthy, you need to eat a variety of foods from the four main food groups including: plenty of fruit and vegetables plenty of bread, rice, potatoes, pasta and other starchy foods some milk and dairy foods some meat, fish, eggs, beans and other non dairy sources of protein The eatwell plate shows the different types of food you need to eat (and in what proportions) to maintain a well-balanced and healthy diet. Read more about preventing malnutrition. Middle aged and underweight Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A dietitian explains how middle-aged and older people can become underweight, with tips on how to eat the right diet and put weight on the healthy way. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Page last reviewed: 21\/01\/2015 Next review due: 21\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 285 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 124  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dehydration Eating disorders Healthy eating Unintentional weight loss External links BAPEN Malnutrition Self-Screening Tool NICE: diet, nutrition and obesity How to have a balanced diet A healthy diet contains food from the five major food groups to give us the energy and nutrients we need Community content from HealthUnlocked The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group Check your BMI Use our healthy weight calculator to easily measure your or your child's body mass index (BMI) NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Vitamins, minerals and supplements","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vitamins-minerals","content":"Vitamins and minerals - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vitamins and minerals  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vitamins and minerals vitamins-minerals Vitamin A vitamins-minerals B vitamins and folic acid vitamins-minerals Vitamin C vitamins-minerals Vitamin D vitamins-minerals Vitamin E vitamins-minerals Vitamin K vitamins-minerals Calcium vitamins-minerals Iodine vitamins-minerals Iron vitamins-minerals Others Introduction  Vitamins and minerals are essential nutrients your body needs in small amounts to work properly. Most people should get all the nutrients they need by eating a varied and balanced diet. The pages in this section contain advice and information on vitamins, minerals and trace elements essential for health, including: what they do how much you need what happens if you have too much safety advice about supplements  For information about nutrition for children, see vitamins for children. Vitamin and mineral supplements If you choose to take vitamin and mineral supplements, be aware that taking too many or for too long can cause harmful effects. Some people may need to take vitamin and mineral supplements. For information on who could benefit from supplements, see Do I need vitamin supplements? If you're trying to cut down on your salt intake, you might want to avoid vitamin and mineral supplements that come as effervescent or fizzy tablets, as they can contain up to 1g of salt per tablet. Get more tips for a lower-salt diet. What are vitamins? There are two types of vitamins: fat-soluble and water-soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins Fat-soluble vitamins are found mainly in fatty foods and animal products, such as vegetable oils, milk and dairy foods, eggs, liver, oily fish and butter. While your body needs these vitamins every day to work properly, you don't need to eat foods containing them every day. This is because your body stores these vitamins in your liver and fatty tissues for future use. These stores can build up so they are there when you need them. However, if you have much more than you need, fat-soluble vitamins can be harmful. Fat-soluble vitamins are: vitamin A  vitamin D  vitamin E  vitamin K  Water-soluble vitamins Water-soluble vitamins are not stored in the body, so you need to have them more frequently. If you have more than you need, your body gets rid of the extra vitamins when you urinate. As the body does not store water-soluble vitamins, these vitamins are generally not harmful. However, this doesn't mean that all large amounts are necessarily harmless. Water-soluble vitamins are found in a wide range of foods, including fruit, vegetables, potatoes, grains, milk and dairy foods. Unlike fat-soluble vitamins, they can be destroyed by heat or being exposed to the air. They can also be lost in water used for cooking. This means that by cooking foods, especially boiling them, we lose some of these vitamins. The best way to keep as many of the water-soluble vitamins as possible is to steam or grill foods, rather than boil them, or to use the cooking water in soups or stews rather than pouring it away. Water-soluble vitamins are vitamin C, the B vitamins and folic acid. There are also many other types of vitamins and minerals that are an important part of a healthy diet. What are minerals? Minerals are necessary for three main reasons: building strong bones and teeth controlling body fluids inside and outside cells turning the food you eat into energy Minerals are found in foods such as meat, cereals (including cereal products such as bread), fish, milk and dairy foods, vegetables, fruit (especially dried fruit) and nuts. Essential minerals include calcium and iron, although there are also many other types of minerals that are an important part of a healthy diet. What are trace elements? Trace elements are also essential nutrients that your body needs to work properly, but in much smaller amounts than vitamins and minerals. Trace elements are found in small amounts in a variety of foods such as meat, fish, cereals, milk and dairy foods, vegetables and nuts. Examples of trace elements are iodine and fluoride. Page last reviewed: 18\/02\/2015 Next review due: 18\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1127 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 321  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 133  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 478  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Do I need vitamin supplements? Food and diet Special report: supplements Vitamins for children Vitamins and nutrition in pregnancy External links Food Standards Agency (FSA) Healthy Start Community content from HealthUnlocked Does your child need vitamin drops? Find out why vitamins are so important to your child's health, and which vitamin supplements are recommended Vitamins and special diets during pregnancy The essential vitamins and minerals, and how to get enough of them in pregnancy Healthy eating Information on how to achieve a balanced diet, tips to help you get your 5 A DAY, plus advice for vegetarians Vitamin D Read more about vitamin D, which helps regulate calcium and phosphate levels in the body and keeps bones and teeth healthy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}